---
title: Leibniz on Monads, Souls, and Their Properties
layout: post
---

*This is Part 1 of a three-part series in which I share my thoughts on
G. W. Leibniz's* Monadology*. In this part, I will introduce Leibniz's
concepts of monads; perception and appetition; and entelechies, souls,
and rational souls.*

*An overview of the concepts in Spinoza's metaphysics to which I refer
in this article may be found in my article, "[Spinoza on Faith and
Philosophy]({% post_url 2023-05-03-spinoza-on-faith-versus-philosophy %})."*

## ¶¶1--3: Simple and Composite Substances 

Leibniz conceives of *monads* as the fundamental ontological entities
constituting reality. He defines a monad as "a simple substance," that
is, a substance "without parts." These monads can form *composites* with
other monads, and it is through these composites that we can discern
their existence. However, because the monads themselves have no parts,
it is impossible to conceive them as having shape and extension, since
extensible objects can be mentally subdivided into parts. Leibniz
states, "These monads are the true atoms of nature and, in brief, the
elements of things."

Because Leibniz's metaphysics draws on concepts from the philosophy of
René Descartes, it will be informative to examine each of the terms he
introduces in the first few paragraphs of the *Monadology* to identify
the ways he is engaging with Cartesian thought. For this purpose, I will
refer to a work by the third major rationalist besides Descartes and
Leibniz---Benedict de Spinoza---who wrote a useful textbook on the
*Principles of Cartesian Philosophy*.

First, Cartesian philosophy defines *substance* as "that which needs, in
order to exist, only the cooperation of God" (Spinoza 1961: 2D2).
Because every monad is a substance, it does not depend on its existence
for anything else besides God. That is, a monad depends for its
existence neither on any constituent parts nor on any composite
substance to which it belongs.

Here the similarities and differences between Leibniz and Spinoza's
respective conceptions of substance become evident. In the *Ethics*,
Spinoza defines *substance* as "that which is in itself and is conceived
through itself," such that "no concept of any other thing is needed for
forming a concept of it" (Spinoza 2018: 1D3). Leibniz likewise conceives
of a simple substance as that which depends on nothing else for its
existence, but he introduces two qualifiers. First, Leibniz posits the
existence of a God extrinsic to simple substances on which their
existence depends. In doing so, he rejects Spinoza's argument that God
is the immanent, rather than the transitive, cause of all things.
Second, for Leibniz, there are many unique monads or simple substances.
This immediately distinguishes his metaphysics from Spinoza's, which
maintains that only a single substance (God) exists, and that all finite
things are *modes* of this single substance.

The second Cartesian term that Leibniz uses is *atom*, which is defined
as "a part of matter indivisible by nature" (Spinoza 1961: 2D3). Because
monads are, by definition, indivisible, they are atoms. Cartesian
philosophy defines something as being *divisible* if "we know [it] can
be divided mentally ... at least potentially" (Spinoza 1961: 2D7). A
monad cannot even potentially be divided mentally, because there is
nothing more fundamental than a monad that we can conceive. Therefore, a
monad cannot be said to depend on any component parts.

Third, Leibniz uses the Cartesian term *extension* to describe "that
which consists of three dimensions" (Spinoza 1961: 2D1). Cartesian
philosophy maintains that "Every extension can be divided, at least in
thought" (Spinoza 1961: 2A9). Thus, because monads are indivisible, they
are not extensible. Moreover, since Cartesian philosophy maintains that
"[m]otion, rest, shape, and similar ideas cannot be conceived without
extension" (Spinoza 1961: 2A6), monads do not have a shape, nor can they
be said to move.

Finally, Leibniz draws on the Cartesian argument that composite
substances must exist because "[w]here there is extension or space, a
substance is necessarily there" (Spinoza 1961: 2L1). In his commentary
on Cartesian philosophy, Spinoza demonstrates this lemma using the axiom
that "Nothingness has no properties" (Spinoza 1961: 2A1). Since
extension consists of three dimensions, it cannot be absolute
nothingness, which would have no dimensions at all. It therefore must be
an attribute of something. Since God, according to the Cartesian
philosophers, is incorporeal (Spinoza 1961: 1P16)---a position with
which Spinoza himself disagreed---it must be an attribute of something
that only requires God's cooperation for its existence, since "All that
exists is conserved by the power of God alone" (Spinoza 1961: 1P12). In
other words, extension must be an attribute of substance. Therefore,
although monads are not themselves extensible, in Leibniz's view,
extension must consist of monads, which are simple substances, inasmuch
as substance is necessarily present where extension is present.

## ¶¶4--7: The Creation and Destruction of Substances 

Since monads do not consist of parts, they cannot be dissolved.
Likewise, they "cannot be formed by composition" of parts. Thus they
"can only begin or end all at once, that is, they can only begin by
creation and end by annihilation." That is, inasmuch as it is possible
for monads to appear or disappear, they cannot do so "naturally" or
because of some characteristic intrinsic to their nature. Rather, they
can only be created or annihilated by something extrinsic to their
nature. The only thing that can affect a monad from without is that on
which all monads depend for their existence, namely God. Therefore, only
God can create or annihilate monads, and this must happen
supernaturally. Leibniz's supernaturalism follows from his extrinsic and
transitive conception of God.

For Leibniz, only "composites begin or end through their parts." Only
composites are subject to alteration by having parts added or removed.
By contrast, monads cannot "be altered or changed internally by some
other creature, since one cannot transpose anything in it." Moreover,
because monads have no internal components that can be said to move, it
is impossible for anything external to a monad to change its inner
constitution by influencing the movement of its components. For this
reason, Leibniz states that "monads have no windows through which
something can enter or leave."

## ¶¶8--13: Qualities and Internal Principles 

Although monads are windowless, they nonetheless "must have some
qualities, otherwise they would not even be beings." Moreover, monads
must have certain qualities whereby they can be distinguished from each
other, since the qualities of a composite are determined by the monads
that comprise it. If a composite's component monads had no qualities
whereby they could be distinguished, then no two composites could be
distinguished from each other.

Considered from another perspective, if every point or monad in a plenum
(a space contiguously filled with matter) were the same, then if the
plenum was set "in motion, each place [i.e. each point in the plenum]
would always receive only the equivalent of what it already had" after a
given interval of time. That is, at each moment in time during the
motion of the plenum, the monad located at a particular point would be
identical to the monad located at that point previously (since there
would be no qualities by which the monad previously located at that
point could be distinguished from the monad currently located at that
point), and thus "one state of things would be indistinguishable from
another." Additionally, since there are never two beings "in which it is
not possible to discover an internal difference," there are no two
beings exactly alike, and thus each monad must be different from the
others.

Although nothing external to a monad can cause movement among its inner
parts (since a monad has no distinctive parts), monads are subject to
continuous change. This change must be caused by "an internal
principle." Moreover, the presence of change in monads suggests that
there is an inner diversity of the qualities they have over time.
Leibniz states, "This diversity must involve a multitude in the unity or
in the simple. For, since all natural change is produced by degrees,
something changes and something remains. As a result, there must be a
plurality of properties [*affections*] and relations in the simple
substance, although it has no parts."

Leibniz's conception of the properties (affections) of a monad as those
qualities which enable it to change over time is analogous to Spinoza's
definition of modes as the affections of the single substance (God).
Modes, in Spinoza's thought, belong to *natura naturata*, the realm of
objects which have the ability to exert influences on others, while
substance belongs to *natura naturans*, in which everything that exists
and happens is seen as determined by God's infinite nature. What belongs
to *natura naturans* are those entities which cannot be conceived as
consisting of inessential parts or as subject to change under external
influences (i.e. God in Spinoza's metaphysics or any monad in Leibniz's
metaphysics), while what belongs to *natura naturata* are those entities
which can be conceived as consisting of parts and as subject to change
under external influences.

## ¶¶14--17: Perception and Appetition 

For Leibniz, the changes that occur within a monad due to its inner
diversity can be discerned or quantified because every monad has an
inherent ability to perceive its internal changes. He defines
*perception* as the "passing state which involves and represents a
multitude in the unity or in the simple substance." He emphasizes that
perception, in this sense, should not be confused with *apperception* or
*consciousness*. That is, although every monad can perceive its own
internal changes, this does not mean that it is necessarily self-aware
or that it retains a memory of its previous perceptions.

Leibniz argues that "perception, and what depends on it, is inexplicable
in terms of mechanical reasons, that is, through shapes and motions."
For instance, we could not imagine any mechanism within a clock as
capable of perceiving the changes that take place among its wheels,
spindles, and other components. Rather, "when inspecting its interior,
we will only find parts that push one another, and we will never find
anything to explain a perception." There is no sense in which the
actions of one part of a machine upon another could be plausibly
conceived as a form of perception. Perception therefore cannot consist
in the interaction of the parts of a thing---that is, perception is not
an emergent property of composites---but it must be found only in simple
substances (monads).

Leibniz's conception of monads as involving perception is analogous to
Spinoza's conception of the attributes of substance. Spinoza defines an
*attribute* as "that which an intellect perceives of substance as
constituting its essence" (Spinoza 2018: 1D4). Likewise, Leibniz
conceives of monads as involving a simple substance's perception of the
changes that occur within itself and constitute its essence. However, in
Spinoza's metaphysics, there are only two attributes of
substance---namely, thought and extension, whereas in Leibniz's
metaphysics, there are an infinite number of unique monads.

For Leibniz, the changes that occur within a monad can only take place
because of an *appetition* inherent to the monad, which Leibniz defines
as "the action of the internal principle which brings about the change
or the passage from one perception to another." Although this action
does not always attain the end or "perception toward which it tends," it
nonetheless "always obtains something of it, and reaches new
perceptions." In other words, as Spinoza analogously suggests concerning
the essence of each thing, every monad has an inner endeavor (*conatus*)
by which it strives to become what it is (i.e. to persevere in its
being), and this endeavor is its appetition.

The main contrasts to be drawn here between Spinoza's concept of the
*conatus* and Leibniz's concept of appetition are (1) that Spinoza is
discussing objects in *natura naturata*, which are not subject to change
except under the influence of external objects, whereas Leibniz is
discussing objects in *natura naturans*, which are subject to internal
change; and (2) that while Leibniz suggests that substances may act for
the sake of a final cause, to which it may not perfectly attain, Spinoza
denies this, suggesting instead that so long as a thing persists in its
being, it has complete perfection. There are no degrees of perfection
within Spinoza's thought (except as a matter of our subjective
evaluation of our condition), as there are within Leibniz's thought, in
which things may be differentiated by the extent to which they have
satisfied their appetition to accurately mirror or represent the
universe (as discussed later in the *Monadology*).

There are several noteworthy consequences to these differences in their
metaphysics. First, one could argue that if a monad does not satisfy its
appetition, this must be due to something analogous to a free will
possessed by the monad itself, by which it "chooses" not to be perfect.
By contrast, Spinoza denies free will, which is not necessary in his
metaphysics since reality is perfect as it is, and therefore has no
reason to strive towards a standard of perfection which it may not
attain.

Second, Leibniz's metaphysics enables us to distinguish things
*substantially* (since they are conceived in themselves as that in which
their qualities inhere) rather than merely *modally*, as in Spinoza's
metaphysics (see Spinoza 2018: 1P15S). This is because although monads
are differentiated by the qualities that inhere in them, it is
nonetheless possible to conceive monads as distinct from each other,
since not all possible qualities inhere within all possible monads. The
substances in which these qualities inhere must not be the same,
otherwise all qualities could inhere in them, and it would be impossible
to distinguish them.

Finally, Leibniz's notion of appetition allows him to conceive of things
not merely in terms of duration or *extensity* (in time), but also in
terms of a sort of *intensity*, determined by the extent to which their
appetition is satisfied or to which they attain perfection. This
accounts for something dissatisfying in Spinoza's ethics, namely that
the human mind, as a mode, does not merely involve an endeavor to
persevere in its existence. The length of one's life would not matter
were it not accompanied by one's satisfaction with their life. Spinoza
accounts for subjective satisfaction or perfection with his notion of
blessedness, but the blessedness he conceives is nonetheless directed
towards one's virtue or active power to persevere in being. It does not
account for the satisfaction or perfection one might attain in pursuit
of ideals that are not concerned solely with one's perseverance in
being, such as aesthetic ideals, which might involve the enjoyment of
passions that are not, in Spinoza's view, essential to one's identity.

## ¶¶18--30: Entelechies, Souls, and Rational Souls 

Leibniz states that monads "have in themselves a certain perfection,"
namely "a sufficiency ... that makes them the sources of their internal
actions." It is this self-sufficiency that makes a monad a substance, or
something that depends on nothing else (besides God) for its being.
According to Leibniz, to the extent that monads have perception and
appetition, they are comparable to living souls. However, he reserves
the word "soul" for monads that also have memory, while he calls monads
that do not have memory "entelechies" (a word drawn from Aristotle that
means a thing that has perfection within itself).

Leibniz explains that even though a monad may not have perception, this
does not mean "that in such a state the simple substance is without any
perception," since a monad "cannot subsist without some property
[*affection*]," namely perception. It is possible for a soul to enter
a state in which it has no memory or consciousness of its perceptions,
but in this state, its perceptions do not cease, since this would imply
the natural dissolution of a monad, which is impossible. Rather, its
perceptions are simply indistinct. Nonetheless, a soul that has
temporarily lost its consciousness or memory can recover from this
state, and given that it can afterwards apperceive its perceptions, "it
must be the case that [it] had some perceptions immediately before,"
since "a perception can only come naturally from another perception, as
a motion can only come naturally from a motion." Leibniz suggests that
even in death, a soul retains its perception, although not its memory or
consciousness, since no monad can end through natural causes like
dissolution.

Leibniz distinguishes memory from reason, arguing that "men act like
beasts insofar as the sequence of their perceptions results from the
principle of memory alone." In his view, memory consists of
representations of things that the soul perceives, the strengths of
which are due either to "the magnitude or the multitude of the preceding
perceptions" that have caused their images to be represented in the
mind. By contrast, reason involves "the knowledge of eternal and
necessary truths." Leibniz argues that it is this knowledge that
"distinguishes us from simple animals and furnishes us with reason and
the sciences" and that constitutes the mind.

Moreover, it is through "the knowledge of necessary truths and through
their abstractions that we rise to *reflective acts*, which enable us to
think of that which is called 'I' and enable us to consider that this or
that is in us." All our metaphysical concepts, such as being, substance,
the simple and the composite, the immaterial, and God, follow from these
reflective acts, which "furnish the principle objects of our
reasonings." Leibniz's distinction between memory and reason corresponds
to Spinoza's distinction between the first and second kinds of
cognition, that is, imagination and reason. It also establishes a
three-tiered hierarchy of monads, consisting of (1) entelechies, which
only have perception and appetition; (2) souls, which are entelechies
with memory; and (3) rational souls, which are souls with reason.

---

### Citation Notes

Every citation of Leibniz's *Monadology* in this article is taken from
the paragraph(s) mentioned in the corresponding section header.

Rather than citing Spinoza's works by page number, I am citing them by
chapter and proposition (e.g., proposition 7 of chapter 3 is cited as
3P7). The following abbreviations are used in my citations of
Spinoza's *Ethics* and *Principles of Cartesian Philosophy*: A = axiom;
App = appendix item; C = corollary; D = definition; L = lemma; P =
proposition; and S = scholium.

### Bibliography

Leibniz, G. W., *Monadology* (trans. Roger Ariew and Daniel Garber), in
Carl Levenson and Jonathan Westphal (eds.), *Reality* (Indianapolis:
Hackett, 1994).

Spinoza, Benedict de (tran. Harry E. Wedeck), *Principles of Cartesian
Philosophy* (New York: Philosophical Library, 1961).

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Matthew J. Kisner, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Matthew J. Kisner), *Ethics Proved in Geometrical Order* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2018).
