---
title: Spinoza on the Emotions and Virtue (Part 1)
layout: post
---

*This is Part 1 in a two-part series in which I will examine Benedict de
Spinoza's definitions and evaluations of common emotions in the*
Ethics*.*

*For an introduction to Spinoza's conception of God, which is referenced
in this article, see my previous article "[Spinoza on Faith versus
Philosophy]({% post_url 2023-05-03-spinoza-on-faith-versus-philosophy %})."*

## Emotions 

An *action* occurs "when something takes place within us or outside us
of which we are the adequate cause." A *passion* occurs "when something
takes place within us or something follows from our nature of which we
are only a partial cause" (3D3).

Spinoza explains in 3D2 that a cause is *adequate* "if its effect can be
clearly and distinctly perceived through it." Therefore, a person is
active when their actions may be clearly perceived as effected by their
own nature, and passive when their actions can only partially be
perceived as effected by their own nature.

*Emotions* are "affections of the body by which the body's power of
action is augmented or diminished, assisted or restrained" (3D3).
Spinoza explains that "by an emotion I mean an action if we can be the
adequate cause of any of these affections; if not I mean a passion."
Therefore, not all emotions are necessarily passions; rather, there are
active emotions, namely spiritedness and generosity, which I will
discuss in Part 2.

## Actions and Passions 

The first thing that constitutes the essence of the mind is the idea of
the body. This idea is composed of many others (because the body is
composed of many different organs), some of which are adequate and some
of which are inadequate. Anything that follows from the nature of the
mind must therefore follow necessarily from an idea that is either
adequate or inadequate. Our mind sometimes acts and is sometimes acted
on. A mind *acts* when it is the adequate cause of an effect---that is,
when God or substance, of which the mind is a *mode* in the attribute of
thought, is the cause insofar as he (i.e. the mind as a mode of God) is
affected by an idea (i.e. another mode in the attribute of thought)
which is adequately perceived by the mind. A mind is *acted on* when it
is a partial cause of an effect that is not adequately perceived by it.
Therefore, the actions of the mind arise from its adequate ideas, while
the passions depend on inadequate ideas (3P3).

Spinoza explains in 3P3S, "We see therefore that passions are only
attributed to the mind insofar as it contains something which involves
negation, *or* insofar as it is considered as a part of nature which by
itself, apart from other things, cannot be clearly and distinctly
perceived." In psychoanalytic terms, the part of the mind which involves
negation might be called the *unconscious*.

## Essence 

Effects necessarily follow from the essence of a given thing, and a
thing can only do what necessarily follows from its determinate nature.
Moreover, everything is a specific and determinate expression of God's
power of existing and acting, and as such, it cannot be destroyed except
by an external cause (which is also an expression of God's power).
Therefore, the power or endeavor of a thing to persevere in its own
being is the essence of that thing (3P7).

In other words, the essence of a thing is its striving (*conatus* or
endeavor) to persevere in its existence. There is no purpose for the
existence of a thing beyond the fulfillment of this essential striving.
This principle applies both to objects in nature and to human beings.
Nature was not created primarily for our benefit, nor does it evolve to
satisfy any endeavor extrinsic to its own survival. Likewise, human
beings were not made to satisfy some ideal of what is good or perfect
that is extrinsic to their nature.

## Will, Appetite, and Desire 

In 3P9S, Spinoza defines *will* as the endeavor to persevere in one's
being when it "is related to the mind alone." He defines *appetite* as
the endeavor to persevere in one's being when "it is related to mind and
body simultaneously," adding that it "is nothing but a human being's
very essence." That is, because "things that serve his preservation
necessarily follow from its nature ... a person is determined to do
those things." Finally, Spinoza defines *desire* as "appetite together
with consciousness of it."

Spinoza argues that "we do not endeavor anything, we do not will
anything, we do not seek or desire anything, because we judge it to be
good; on the contrary, we judge a thing to be good because we endeavor
it, will it, seek it and desire it" (3P9S). It is for this reason that
he defines *good* as "that which we certainly know to be useful to us"
and *bad* as "that which we certainly know hinders us from becoming
possessed of any good thing" (4D1--2). His assumption in these
definitions is that our judgment of what is good and bad is correct,
provided that we have certain knowledge. That is, he assumes that
because reality is perfect (2D6), we can rely on our moral judgments if
we have adequate knowledge. For Spinoza, if we have an adequate
understanding of reality, we will recognize that it is perfect as it is,
because it follows from the necessity of God's infinite nature. Because
our essential nature, which consists of our striving to persevere in our
existence, also follows necessarily from God's nature, it is good that
we should engage in that striving, and the more effectively we do so,
the more subjectively perfect we are. (On this point, Spinoza is the
opposite of Schopenhauer, who regarded human existence not as good but
as suffering. For this reason, he advocated the denial of the "will to
life." This pessimistic conclusion follows from his distinction between
will and the intellect, which Spinoza regards as one and the same. See
Janaway 1997.) Because we can only fulfill that striving with adequate
knowledge, we can only experience full perfection if we overcome our
passions, which reflect our inadequate knowledge.

In 3DOE1, Spinoza repeats, "Desire is the very essence of a human being
insofar as it is conceived to act in some way as a result of any given
affection of it." That is, although desire, which is the conscious
endeavor to persevere in one's existence (as that endeavor is related to
both body and mind), is the essence of a human being, it nonetheless
involves an affect by which a person is caused to act. Spinoza explains
that it is important to affirm this because the mind does not know
itself except insofar as it perceives ideas of the affections of the
body (2P23). As an affect, desire can cause us to behave in a variety of
ways. Spinoza states, "Under the term desire I mean here any and all
endeavors, impulses, appetites and volitions of a person, which vary
with the varying constitution of the person and are quite often so
opposed to each other that the person is pulled in different directions
and does not know which way to go" (3DOE1, explanation).

In five propositions, Spinoza describes the means by which we can
determine whether desires are good or bad:

\(1\) *Everyone necessarily seeks what they judge to be good* (4P19).
*Good* is what we certainly know to be useful to us (i.e. useful to our
perseverance in being), while *bad* is what we certainly know prevents
us from attaining what is good. In other words, good and bad
respectively augment or diminish our power of existing. Therefore, when
we are affected by joy or sadness (see 3P11S), we call it good or bad,
and thus our cognition of good or bad follows from an emotion of joy or
sadness. Moreover, the idea is connected to the affect in the same way
as the mind is united with the body, so that the idea cannot be
distinguished from the emotion. Thus the cognition of good or bad is
simply our consciousness of joy or sadness.

We desire to bring about everything that we imagine contributes to joy
and to prevent or destroy everything that we imagine impedes joy or
contributes to sadness (see 3P28). Since this desire or appetite
constitutes our essence as a human being, a person therefore necessarily
seeks what they judge to be good and is averse to what they judge to be
bad.

\(2\) *A person is virtuous insofar as they are empowered to persevere
in their being* (4P20). Spinoza defines *virtue* as power, since
"insofar as virtue is related to a human being, it is the very essence
of a human being *or* his nature insofar as it has the ability to effect
certain things that can be understood through the laws of his nature
alone" (4P8). Therefore, the more or less a person is empowered in their
endeavor to persevere in existing, the more or less they are endowed
with virtue.

Spinoza explains in 4P20S that the only reason a person dies by suicide
is because they are overcome by external causes against their nature,
since it is impossible that a person should endeavor by the necessity of
their nature to not exist.

\(3\) *No one desires to live well if they do not desire to live*
(4P21). Desire is one's consciousness of their will to live. Unless a
person has a will to live and is conscious of it, they cannot be
conscious of any desire to live well, that is, to be more fully
empowered to persevere in living.

\(4\) *No virtue can be conceived that is prior to one's endeavor to
persevere in their existence* (4P22). If a virtue is conceived as prior
to one's endeavor to persevere in their existence, then this virtue must
constitute one's essence (i.e. their power to effect those things that
follow necessarily from the laws of their nature). But then one's
essence (i.e. their power to act) would precede their existence, which
is absurd.

Like the existentialists, Spinoza denies that essence precedes
existence. By "essence," he means both the power of a thing (i.e. its
capacity to cause things from its own nature) and its virtue (i.e. what
enables it to recognize its perfection). Neither of these senses of the
word "essence" may be meaningfully applied to a thing prior to its
existence. Nevertheless, Spinoza cannot be considered an existentialist
for two reasons. First, as a rationalist, Spinoza denies that one's
passive emotions constitute their identity. Thus, unlike the
existentialists, he does not regard irrationalism as an indispensable
aspect of human existence. Second, Spinoza denies that people have free
will, which the existentialists regard as necessary for us to affirm if
we are to be authentic.

An important consequence of 4P22 is that no one endeavors to persevere
in their being for the sake of something else (4P25). Spinoza considers
it absurd to suggest that people exist for the sake of attaining some
virtue external to their own striving to exist, especially if that
virtue is at odds with their existence. He would therefore regard it as
absurd to suggest, for instance, that people exist for the purpose of
worshiping or obeying God (or that to worship or obey God constitutes
their essence), especially if their acts of worship or obedience have no
direct relevance to one's perseverance in existing, except insofar as it
enables them to avoid divine retribution.

\(5\) *To act virtuously is to act by the command of reason* (4P24).
Because we can only act insofar as we understand, to act virtuously
(i.e. by the laws of one's own nature) is to act by the command of
reason, by which we understand the laws of our nature.

Spinoza's use of the phrase "command of reason" appears to suggest that
reason, in his view, is heteronomous rather than autonomous. However, it
is important to remember that because Spinoza only regards one's
actions, and not their passions, as belonging to their identity, he sees
no conflict between reason and autonomy (or positive action). Such a
conflict is only possible if we believe that it is no less autonomous
for us to act under the influence of our passive emotions than for us to
act according to reason, or if we believe that virtue is not necessarily
compatible with our happiness.

## Joy and Sadness 

In 3P11S, Spinoza defines *joy* as "the passion by which the mind passes
to a greater perfection" and *sadness* as "the passion by which it
passes to a lesser perfection." He defines *delight* or *cheerfulness*
as "the emotion of joy [when it] is related to mind and body
simultaneously," and *distress* or *melancholy* as "the emotion of
sadness [when it] is related to mind and body simultaneously." He
clarifies, though, "that delight and distress are attributed to a person
when one part of him is more affected than the rest," whereas
"cheerfulness and melancholy are attributed to him when all parts are
equally affected." Spinoza calls desire, joy, and sadness the three
*primary emotions* from which all others are composed or derived.

In 3DOE2--3, Spinoza repeats that *joy* is "the passing of a person from
a lesser to a greater perfection" and that *sadness* is "the passing of
a person from greater to lesser perfection." He emphasizes that "joy is
not perfection itself," but is rather the *passage* to perfection, since
"if a person were born with the perfection he is passing to, he would be
in possession of it without any emotion of joy." A person is not
saddened by their lack of perfection, nor are they saddened by the
perfection they still retain after passing to a lesser perfection.
Rather, they are saddened insofar as they contrast their current state
of imperfection with their previous state of perfection, and likewise
they rejoice insofar as they contrast their previous state of
imperfection with their current state of perfection.

Spinoza argues that joy is good because it augments the body's power of
action, and that conversely, sadness is bad because it diminishes the
body's power of action (4P41). Cheerfulness is always good, and can
never be excessive, because it augments all parts of the body equally.
Conversely, distress is always bad because it diminishes the power of
all parts of the body equally (4P42). Delight, by contrast, can be bad
and excessive, since it can affect some parts of the body
disproportionately and can thereby harm the body as a whole. Moreover,
distress can be good insofar as it prevents delight from becoming
excessive (4P43).

Nonetheless, Spinoza insists that those who are wise will enjoy
pleasure. In 4P45S, Spinoza states that laughter and joking are pure
joys (provided that they are not derisive and motivated by hatred) and
are therefore good in themselves, provided they are not excessive. Only
a superstitious person, in his view, forbids pleasure. "No deity and no
one but an envious person takes pleasure in my lack of power or
misfortune, nor regards as virtue our tears, sobbing, fears, and other
such things that are signs of a powerless spirit." Spinoza states,

> On the contrary, the greater the joy we are affected by, the greater
> the perfection we pass to, i.e. the more we must necessarily be
> sharing in the divine nature. Therefore to use and take pleasure in
> things as much as possible (thought not to the point of disgust, for
> that is not pleasure) is the part of a wise person. It is, I say, the
> part of a wise person to refresh and restore himself with a moderate
> amount of good food and drink, as well as with pleasant scents, the
> beauty of green plants, dress, music, sports, public entertainments
> and other such things that each person can enjoy without any injury to
> others.

## Love and Hatred 

In 3P13S, Spinoza defines *love* as "joy accompanied by the idea of an
external cause" and *hatred* as "sadness accompanied by the idea of an
external cause." He adds that a person who is affected by love towards a
thing will desire to preserve it and to have it in their presence, while
a person who is affected by hatred towards a thing will desire to
destroy it or to dispel it from their presence.

In 3DOE6--7, Spinoza repeats these definitions of love and hatred
verbatim. Concerning love, he explains, "The definition given by writers
who define *love as the will of the lover to unite himself with the
beloved thing* expresses not the essence of love but its property."
Although Spinoza does not deny that this is a property of love, he is
careful to distinguish it from the essence of love. Additionally, he is
careful to explain that by the *will* of a person to be united with the
object of their love, he means "the lover's contentment in the presence
of the beloved thing, which strengthens or at least fosters his joy."

The definition of love as the will to be united with its object is
promoted, for instance, by Paul Tillich, who states, "Love is the drive
to the reunity of the separated" (Tillich 1954: 25). Tillich
distinguishes between four types or *qualities* of love: (1)
*epithymia*, which is one's desire for unity with that which sustains
and reproduces life; (2) *eros*, which is one's desire for unity with
that which they consider valuable; (3) *philia*, which is one's desire
to be united with another person while respecting their individuality;
and (4) *agape*, which resolves the ambiguities present in the lower
forms of love---namely, the tendency of *epithymia* to objectify others;
the "aesthetic detachment" of *eros*; and the partiality of *philia*
(Tillich 1954: 28--31, 117--19). Tillich prefers to call these
"qualities" rather than "types" of love, because in his view they are
distinguished by their subjective value and not by being a different
type of desire for unity.

For Spinoza, by contrast, varieties of love are merely distinguished by
the various external causes to which the feeling of joy is connected. He
would agree with Tillich that the desire to be with the object of love
is the same in all cases. However, the subjective value of love is a
different issue than the external object with which it is connected. The
quality or subjective value of love is determined by whether it is
excessive. Ambition, gluttony, drunkenness, avarice, and lust are all
forms of love (3DOE44--48), but what makes them harmful is not that one
should love glory, food, drink, money, and sex, or even that one should
love these things as much as they love another person, but that one
should love these things immoderately.

As Spinoza explains in 4P44, it is possible for love to be excessive
because delight, when it is accompanied by the idea of an external
cause, is a form of love. Likewise, it is possible for desire to be
excessive, inasmuch as it can be strengthened by the emotions from which
it arises. What makes ambition, gluttony, drunkenness, avarice, and lust
bad is that they do not affect all parts of the body equally and can
therefore diminish the body's perfection as a whole.

Although love, inasmuch as it is a joy, can be good, Spinoza states in
4P45, "Hatred can never be good." It is bad to endeavor to destroy
someone, as one desires to do when they hate another. A virtuous person
will necessarily desire good for others as well as for themselves
(4P37). Spinoza notes two corollaries to this proposition. First,
emotions which arise from hatred are necessarily bad, inasmuch as hatred
is bad. These include envy, derision, disdain, anger, and vengeance
(4P37C1). Second, he states that in a civil society, hatred is unjust
(4P37C2).

---

### Citation Notes

Rather than citing Spinoza's *Ethics* by page number, I am citing it by
chapter and proposition (e.g., proposition 7 of chapter 3 is cited as
3P7). The following abbreviations are used in my citations of
Spinoza's *Ethics*: A = axiom; App = appendix item; C = corollary; D =
definition; DOE = definition of emotion (at the end of book 3); L =
lemma; P = proposition; and S = scholium.

### Bibliography

Janaway, Christopher, "Schopenhauer," in Keith Thomas (ed.), *German
Philosophers* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Matthew J. Kisner, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Matthew J. Kisner), *Ethics Proved in Geometrical Order* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2018).

Tillich, Paul, *Love, Power, and Justice* (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1954).
