---
title: Spinoza on the Prophetic Imagination and Religious Authority
layout: post
---

*This is Part 2 of a two-part series in which I will examine the
relationship between faith and philosophy as it was conceived by the
seventeenth-century philosopher Benedict de Spinoza. In this part, I
will discuss Spinoza's conception of the prophetic imagination in light
of his epistemology. I will also consider his argument in the*
Theological-Political Treatise *concerning the right of sovereign
authorities over religious matters.*

In my last post, "[Spinoza on Faith versus
Philosophy]({% post_url 2023-05-03-spinoza-on-faith-versus-philosophy %}),"
I discussed Spinoza's seven tenets of universal faith, which Spinoza
insists are necessary for the religious citizens of a society to accept
if they are to live together in harmony. He summarizes his position by
stating, "faith ... requires not so much truth as piety; and since faith
is pious and apt for salvation only by way of obedience, no one is
faithful except on the ground of obedience. It is, therefore, not the
man who advances the best reasons who necessarily manifests the best
faith but rather the man who performs the best works of justice and
charity" (Spinoza 2007: 14.11).

Given that faith is not as concerned with truth as with piety, Spinoza
maintains that there is an important distinction to be made "between
faith or theology, on the one side, and philosophy, on the other." He
explains,

> [T]he true aim of philosophy is nothing but truth, but the aim of
> faith, as we have abundantly demonstrated, is simply obedience and
> piety. The foundations of philosophy are universal concepts, and
> philosophy should be drawn from nature alone. But the foundations of
> faith are histories and language and are to be drawn only from
> Scripture and revelation (Spinoza 2007: 14.13).

In other words, while faith is concerned with special revelations given
to particular groups of people at specific points in history, philosophy
is concerned with God's general self-revelation in nature, which is
universally accessible to everyone throughout all time. Although faith
is capable of inducing people to obedience to God, it does not, in
Spinoza's view, to enable people to attain true blessedness, since it
causes people to defer to the heteronomous authority of a
historically-conditioned revelation, rather than to see from the
"vantage of eternity" through the cultivation of their autonomous
reason.

## Imagination, Reason, and Intuition 

The distinction between heteronomous faith and autonomous reason becomes
clearer in light of Spinoza's epistemology. In the *Ethics*, he
identifies three kinds of cognition, or means by which people form
general ideas from their perceptions of external things. The first kind
of cognition is *imagination* or *opinion*. This category includes two
sorts of ideas: those that are formed from "particular things
represented by our sense to our intellect in a mutilated and confused
fashion without any order," and those that are formed "from signs,"
which cause us to recall the mental image of a thing that we have
previously experienced. Both are forms of imagination because their
contents are *images* that impress us immediately without being
organized by our intellect. Since these ideas have not yet been fitted
into a coherent system of rational thought, they possess a low degree of
epistemic certainty. This is why Spinoza regards imagination as
interchangeable with opinion (Spinoza 2018: 2P40S2).

The second kind of cognition is *reason*, which arises from "common
notions and adequate ideas of the properties of things" (Spinoza 2018:
2P40S2). Spinoza explains that certain ideas or notions are common to
everyone. For instance, everyone has a body which is subject to physical
laws and to being affected by external objects (Spinoza 2018: 2P38C). It
is precisely because of this property that we are able to perceive the
existence of the world outside ourselves. He states that the more we
understand these common properties, the more we have an adequate
conception of the world (Spinoza 2018: 2P39C). Reason arises from these
common notions and the ideas we infer from them. What distinguishes
reason from imagination is not that the former relies on empirical
evidence, since imagination is also based on our sensory perceptions.
Rather, reason is distinct from imagination and opinion in that it
orders its sensory impressions according to a common principle---namely,
the principle that everything is subject to logical and causal
necessity.

The third kind of cognition is *intuition*, which Spinoza defines as
knowledge that "proceeds from an adequate idea of the formal essence of
certain attributes of God to an adequate knowledge of the essence of
things" (Spinoza 2018: 2P40S2). Several elements of this definition are
worth noting. First, intuition proceeds from an adequate idea. Contrary
to the usual definition of intuition as a form of knowledge that arises
from unconscious means, Spinoza denies that there is a mystery
concerning the source of intuition: it is the mind "insofar as it
conceives the essence of the body from the vantage of eternity" (Spinoza
2018: 5P31)---that is, insofar as it conceives the essence of the body
"to be contained in God and to follow from the necessity of the divine
nature" (Spinoza 2018: 5P29S).

Second, intuition involves "an adequate idea of the formal essence of
certain attributes of God." The essence to which Spinoza is referring
here is God's eternal nature. He states, "Eternity is the very essence
of God insofar as this involves necessary existence" (Spinoza 2018:
5P30). That is, God could not exist or be conceived except as an eternal
being, and inasmuch as it is possible to conceive eternal things (such
as mathematical truths), God necessarily exists (see Spinoza 2018: 1D8,
2D2). Moreover, when Spinoza refers to "certain attributes of God," he
is referring to those attributes through which God expresses himself in
a way that is accessible to the human intellect, specifically thought
and extension. We can only intuit God's existence through his
self-expression within these attributes.

Finally, intuition consists of a proper ordering of the relationship
between God's eternal essence and the essence of existing things. That
is, it proceeds from an adequate understanding of God's essence to an
adequate knowledge of particular things. What distinguishes intuition
from imagination is that the latter confuses the order of ideas. People
frequently imagine that inanimate things act for the sake of "final
causes." In this way, they confuse the order of cause and effect by
placing effects prior to their "final causes" or aims. This imagination
results from our tendency to project our own motives onto God, nature,
and others. By contrast, intuition recognizes everything as proceeding
from efficient cause to effect. All things, including human beings, only
act insofar as they are caused to act by their essential nature or by
external objects. Ultimately, the effective cause of all things is God,
who determines all things to exist for their respective durations and to
act in their respective ways.

Intuition recognizes God as the first cause of all things, and because
all adequate knowledge follows from this recognition, it is the highest
form of cognition. Spinoza states, "From this kind of cognition arises
the highest contentment of spirit there can be." It produces "a joy
accompanied by the idea of God as its cause," that is, "an intellectual
love of God" (Spinoza 2018: 5P32C). This intellectual love of God, in
Spinoza's view, is the source of blessedness: "We clearly understand
from all this what our salvation *or* blessedness *or* freedom consists
in, namely in a constant and eternal love for God *or* in the love of
God for human beings" (Spinoza 2018: 5P36S).

Although it is through intuition, the third and highest kind of
cognition, that the human mind attains this-worldly salvation, Spinoza
nonetheless maintains that reason, the second kind of cognition, teaches
us the importance of religion. He argues that even if we cannot see from
the vantage of eternity, through reason, "we would still hold that piety
and religion, which ... are related to spiritedness and generosity, are
of the first importance" (Spinoza 2018: 5P36S). Since reason enables us
to seek what is conducive to our endeavor to persevere in being (that
is, it facilitates our spiritedness), and since the formation of just
societies by uniting with each other in common friendship is conducive
to this endeavor (that is, it enables us to act generously), it enables
us to live piously. Moreover, since religion teaches us that God
necessarily exists and that he is the necessary cause of all things, it
is indispensable to religion.

## The Prophetic Imagination 

Spinoza's distinction between imagination and reason in the *Ethics* is
foundational to his conception of prophecy in the *Theological-Political
Treatise*. He defines both *prophecy* and *revelation* as "certain
knowledge about something revealed to men by God," but he adds that
there is an important distinction between these two terms. Revelation
refers to any means by which God makes himself known to us, while
prophecy---specifically, the words of a prophet---is merely one variety
of revelation. Spinoza notes that his definition of revelation can be
applied not only to the words of prophets, but also to natural
knowledge, since "what we know by the natural light of reason depends on
knowledge of God and his eternal decrees alone." Natural knowledge, he
insists, is no less authoritative than prophecy, since its authority is
also derived from God, who created the natural world. "It does not
differ from the knowledge which all men call divine, except that divine
knowledge extends beyond its limits, and the laws of human nature
considered in themselves cannot be the cause of it." In other words,
divine knowledge cannot be explained entirely through human causes,
since what inspires a prophet to prophesy is the impression of external
images on their minds (Spinoza 2007: 1.1--2).

Although God's general revelation in nature is an expression of his
divine nature, Spinoza denies that its practitioners can be called
prophets. A *prophet* is "someone who interprets things revealed by God
to those who cannot themselves achieve certain knowledge of them and can
therefore only grasp by simple faith what has been revealed." A person
does not accept a prophet's teachings on the same authority as one who
understands God through natural reason (Spinoza 2007: 1.3). Rather, they
are "relying solely on the authority of the prophet and the credit which
he enjoys." Spinoza compares a prophet to a sovereign state, explaining
that just as "sovereign authorities are the interpreters of the laws of
their state, because the laws which they make are upheld exclusively by
the authority of the sovereigns themselves and rely upon their testimony
alone," so prophets are the interpreters of their own testimonies
(Spinoza 2007: SN2).

This comparison is significant for Spinoza's main thesis in the
*Theological-Political Treatise*, which is that true religion, piety,
and blessedness can only flourish in a state that remains indifferent to
the specific beliefs of its citizens, provided that they act charitably
and justly. Whenever a state sides with any particular religious group
over another, it effectively aligns itself with a particular religious
revelation, which can only be accepted on the authority of the prophet
to whom it was given and on the authority of the religious institution
that interprets it. In doing so, the sovereign of a state forsakes its
own right or power by deferring to another authority. If a state is to
retain its authority over its citizens, it must reserve to itself the
right to decide whether its citizens are behaving charitably and justly,
even if this involves curtailing the activities of those who, under the
garb of religious observance, do not act charitably and justly. It must
do this, in part, by preserving the distinction between philosophy and
theology.

Spinoza denies that prophets possessed any special insight into God,
since everyone can know God through his general self-revelation in
nature. Nevertheless, he concedes there is a sense in which the
prophets' imagination "cannot be understood from the definition of human
nature" alone. In other words, there is a sense in which a prophet's
revelations originate from God in a way that transcends themselves
(Spinoza 2007: SN3). In the *Ethics*, Spinoza distinguishes between
*action* and *passion*. The former refers to that which happens "of
which we are the adequate cause, i.e. ... when something follows from
our nature, within us or outside of us, which can be clearly and
distinctly understood through it alone." The latter refers to that which
occurs "when something takes place within us or something follows from
our nature of which we are only a partial cause" (Spinoza 2018: 3D2).
Spinoza maintains that a prophet's imagination is a passion, in that
they are acted on by impressions originating from outside themselves.
Thus, their revelations do not result from their own actions and cannot
be ascribed to their essential nature alone. Although this would seem to
suggest that it is not God, but merely external impressions, that are
the partial causes of a prophet's revelations, in fact, because God is
the cause of all things, including these impressions, they may
nonetheless be attributed to him.

Moreover, Spinoza does not deny that the prophets may have had insights
"much beyond the limits of the intellect," since "far more ideas can be
formed from words and images than from the principles and concepts alone
on which all our natural knowledge is built" (Spinoza 2007: 1.28). Here
Spinoza affirms a distinction between conceptual knowledge and mystical
insight that is later echoed by Ludwig Wittgenstein. In his *Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus* (named in reference to Spinoza's
*Theological-Political Treatise*), Wittgenstein distinguishes between
what can be *shown* and what can be *stated*. He suggests that mystical
insight---an intuition of why the world exists---can only be shown,
rather than stated propositionally, as can be done with empirical facts.
He says, "Not *how* the world is, is the mystical, but *that* it is"
(Wittgenstein 1999: 6.44) and "There is indeed the inexpressible. This
*shows* itself; it is the mystical" (Wittgenstein 1999: 6.522). For
Wittgenstein, aesthetic and ethical values belong to this sphere of the
mystical lying beyond the domain of science:

> The sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the world
> everything is as it is and happens as it does happen. *In* it there is
> no value---and if there were, it would be of no value. If there is a
> value which is of value, it must lie outside all happening and
> being-so. For all happening and being-so is accidental. ... Hence also
> there can be no ethical propositions. Propositions cannot express
> anything higher. It is clear that ethics cannot be expressed. Ethics
> is transcendental. (Ethics and aesthetics are one) (Wittgenstein 1999:
> 6.41, 6.42, 6.421; edited for readability).

Ultimately, in Wittgenstein's view, nothing can be affirmatively said
about aesthetics, ethics, and religion, so the appropriate response we
can have towards them is simply to remain silent (Wittgenstein 1999: 7).

In contrast to Wittgenstein, Spinoza believes it is possible to state
ethical truths propositionally, and he demonstrates this rationalistic
faith through his "geometrical" presentation of ideas in the *Ethics*,
modeled after Euclid's *Elements*. Nonetheless, he and Wittgenstein are
aligned in their views that the realm of value extends beyond the limits
of the human intellect, so that it is possible, in Spinoza's view, for a
prophet's imagination to have *religious* value. However, Spinoza denies
that prophetic revelations have much *philosophical* value. Because
prophetic revelations are based on acts of the imagination, they cannot
be regarded as more reliable than God's general self-revelation in
nature. To the contrary, Spinoza argues, "Plain imagination does not of
its own nature provide certainty, as every clear and distinct idea
does." Scientific reasoning, in his view, provides a more reliable
understanding of God than prophetic revelations. Even the prophets
themselves did not regard the revelations they received as reliable
apart from an outward sign. As Spinoza explains, "It was not because of
the revelation itself therefore that the prophets were assured that they
had received a revelation from God but because of a sign." It was for
this reason that "Moses admonishes the Hebrews [in Deuteronomy 18:22]
to seek a sign from prophets, such as the outcome of some future event"
(Spinoza 2007: 2.3).

Spinoza argues that even when it is accompanied by a sign, "prophecy is
inferior to natural knowledge, since it has no need of any sign but
provides certainty by its very nature." The certainty that prophecy
offers is not certainty regarding the scientific validity of its claims,
but only moral certainty. Deuteronomy 13:1--3 indicates that God
occasionally performs miracles through false prophets to test his
people's fidelity to monotheism. Moreover, Ezekiel 14:9 explicitly
states: "If a prophet is deceived and speaks a word, I, the Lord, have
deceived that prophet." Nevertheless, Spinoza maintains, a pious person
will not be deceived by false prophets (see 1 Samuel 24:14) precisely
because they are already pious (Spinoza 2007: 2.3--4).

Spinoza outlines three criteria by which people may validate a prophet's
revelations. He states, "All prophetic certainty therefore was grounded
upon three things: (1) that the matters revealed were very vividly
imagined, as we are affected by objects when we are awake; (2) upon a
sign; and (3) most importantly, that the minds of the prophets were
directed exclusively to what is right and good" (Spinoza 2007: 2.5).
Spinoza denies that other factors, including a prophet's personality,
their style of prophesying, or even their beliefs are as important as
these criteria. Concerning a prophet's beliefs, Spinoza notes "that
prophets held different, or even incompatible, beliefs from one another
and had different preconceptions," and he concludes "that prophecy never
made the prophets more learned, but left them with their preconceived
beliefs" (Spinoza 2007: 2.12).

Spinoza cites several biblical accounts in support of this view, noting
that the Bible's claims are occasionally either inconsistent with
scientific knowledge or with each other. In the case of the Bible's
scientific claims, he denies that Joshua correctly understood the
meteorological phenomena involved in his belief that the sun stood still
in the sky, suggesting that due to the presence of hail or ice in the
air (evident from Joshua 10:11), "there was a greater refraction [of
light] than normal" that may have caused Joshua to believe that the
celestial sphere had halted in its orbit. Spinoza also denies that
Solomon had a correct understanding of the value of pi (the ratio of a
circle's circumference to its diameter), so that the Bible's suggestion
in 1 Kings 7:23 that its value is 3 cannot be taken as authoritative
(Spinoza 2007: 2.13).

In the case of the Bible's internal inconsistencies, Spinoza notes
several instances in which the prophets conflict in their teachings. He
notes that the Jewish rabbis "found the opinions of Ezekiel to be so
much in conflict with those of Moses"---for instance, when Ezekiel
contradicts Exodus 34:7 by denying that God will visit the punishment
for parents' iniquities upon their children---"that they almost decided
not to admit that book among the canonical books, and would have
completely suppressed it if a certain Hananiah had not taken it upon
himself to explain it." Another contradiction occurs between 1 Samuel
15:29 and Jeremiah 18:8--10: in the former passage, it is revealed that
God does not change his decrees even when a person seeks forgiveness,
whereas in the latter, the opposite is stated (Spinoza 2007: 2.17--18).

Spinoza therefore concludes that prophets are not commendable for their
scientific knowledge, but "for their piety and constancy." He states,
"we are not required to believe the prophets in anything beyond what
constitutes the end and substance of revelation," namely "charity and
how to live" and the knowledge of "anything relating to uprightness and
good conduct" (Spinoza 2007: 2.19, 2.12). This sets the tone not only
for the middle portion of the *Theological-Political Treatise*, where
Spinoza applies critical methods of scriptural interpretation to
determining the circumstances of the Bible's composition (an examination
of which is beyond the scope of this article), but also for the last
portion, where the distinction between the intellect and obedience plays
an important part.

## Natural and Civil Right 

Spinoza devotes the last five chapters of the *Theological-Political
Treatise* to discussing the proper relationship between religion,
philosophy, and political authority. In chapter 16, Spinoza introduces
the distinction between *natural* and *civil right* that forms the basis
of his political theory. "By the right and order of nature," he states,
"I mean the rules determining the nature of each individual thing by
which we conceive it is determined naturally to exist and to behave in a
certain way." He argues, "whatever each thing does by the laws of its
nature, that it does with sovereign right, since it is acting as it was
determined to by nature and can not do otherwise." This principle also
applies to people: "as long as people are deemed to live under the
government of nature alone, the person who does not yet know reason or
does not yet have a habit of virtue, lives by the laws of appetite alone
with the same supreme right as he who directs his life by the laws of
reason" (Spinoza 2007: 16.2). Spinoza therefore concludes,

> From this it follows that the right, and the order of nature, under
> which all human beings are born and for the most part live, prohibits
> nothing but what no one desires or no one can do; it does not prohibit
> strife or hatred or anger or fraud or anything at all that appetite
> foments. This is unsurprising since nature is not bound by the laws of
> human reason which aim only at the true interest and conservation of
> humans, but rather by numberless other things that concern the eternal
> order of the whole of nature (of which human beings are but a small
> part), and all individual things are determined to live and behave in
> a certain way only by the necessity of this order. When therefore we
> feel that anything in nature is ridiculous, absurd or bad, it is
> because we know things only in part. We wish everything to be directed
> in ways familiar to our reason, even though what reason declares to be
> bad, is not bad with respect to the order and laws of universal nature
> but only with respect to the laws of our own nature (Spinoza 2007:
> 16.4).

Nevertheless, although something may not be bad with respect to natural
laws, we are justified in seeking what our reason tells us is beneficial
to ourselves. Nothing, Spinoza argues, is more beneficial to us than
"for men to live according to laws and the certain dictates of reason,
which as I have said aim at nothing but men's true interests." To this
end, people "had to ensure that they would collectively have the right
to all things that each individual had from nature and that this right
would no longer be determined by the force and appetite of each
individual but by the power and will of all of them together." Thus,
they had to form a contract with each other, in which they all agreed to
not harm each other; to do nothing that they would not want done to
themselves; and to defend others' rights as their own (Spinoza 2007:
16.5). This contract involved transferring all their individual powers
to society as a whole, which henceforth would possess "the supreme
natural right over all things, i.e., supreme power, which all must obey,
either of their own free will or through fear of the ultimate
punishment"---i.e. capital punishment (Spinoza 2007: 16.8).

This transference of individual rights to society as a whole is what, in
Spinoza's view, constitutes a democracy. He defines a democracy as "a
united gathering of people which collectively has the sovereign right to
do all that it has the power to do." Because the power of this
gathering, once it is constituted, exceeds the power of any one
individual to resist it, Spinoza argues that "sovereign power is bound
by no law and everyone is obliged to obey it in all things" (Spinoza
2007: 16.8). In return, the sovereign authority is "obliged to work for
the common good and direct all things by the dictate of reason," for
unless it does this, it risks becoming illegitimate (Spinoza 2007:
16.9).

Spinoza insists that a person does not become a slave by transferring
their rights entirely to sovereign authorities. This view presupposes "a
slave to be someone who acts on command, and a free person to be one who
behaves as he pleases." But Spinoza denies that to behave solely as one
pleases amounts to true freedom: "anyone who is guided by their own
pleasure in this way and cannot see or do what is good for them, is him
or herself very much a slave. The only [genuinely] free person is one
who lives with his entire mind guided solely by reason." Moreover, it is
not the act of obedience that constitutes slavery, but the reason why
one obeys. As he explains, "If the purpose of the action is not
[one's] own advantage but that of the ruler, then the agent is indeed
a slave." By contrast, provided that a state's laws are "founded on
sound reason" and are concerned with "the safety of the whole people,
not that of the ruler," then one's obedience to the law makes them a
subject rather than a slave. "A slave is someone who is obliged to obey
commands from a master which look only to the advantage of the master
... and a subject is one who does by command of the sovereign what is
useful for the community and consequently also for himself" (Spinoza
2007: 16.10).

Spinoza defines *civil right* as "the freedom of each person to conserve
themselves in their own condition, which is determined by the edicts of
the sovereign power and protected by its authority alone" (Spinoza 2007:
16.13). Here it is helpful to recall, from [Part 1 of this
series]({% post_url 2023-05-03-spinoza-on-faith-versus-philosophy %}),
Spinoza's definition of the essence of a thing as its endeavor to
persevere in its being. Our human nature, in his view, is constituted by
this endeavor to preserve ourselves in our existence. Thus anything that
conduces to the fulfillment of this endeavor is good for us. Inasmuch as
a sovereign authority protects the conditions that contribute to this
essential endeavor, it is good that we should obey it. On the other
hand, if a sovereign authority does not guarantee these conditions, then
it is the citizen's civil right to protest the sovereign's abuse or
neglect of their responsibility.

In addition to defining civil right, Spinoza provides definitions of
several other terms in chapter 16. An *offense* is an action by a
private citizen that causes another person to suffer a loss. *Justice*
is an "intention to assign to each person what belongs to them in
accordance with civil law," that is, in accordance with citizens' civil
rights to freely conserve themselves. Justice is the same as *equity*,
since it involves defending each person's rights equally, "not
begrudging the rich or despising the poor." An *alliance* is "a mutual
agreement [between two states] not to harm one another, and to give
assistance to each other when need arises, while each side retains its
own independence," while an *enemy* is "someone who lives outside a
state in the sense that he does not recognize the authority of the state
either as its ally or as its subject." Finally, *treason* occurs when a
subject "has attempted to seize the right of supreme power in some way
or to transfer it to someone else." Importantly, if the subject has
succeeded in this attempt, then the action does not count as treason
because the power they have seized would no longer belong to the
authority from which they seized it. Moreover, it does not matter
whether the (people of a) state would ultimately benefit from the
seizure of power: the sovereign authority, so long as it possesses the
right or power transferred to it by its subjects, retains the right to
punish the traitor (Spinoza 2007: 16.13--18).

Here, as elsewhere in the *Theological-Political Treatise*, Spinoza does
not use the word "right" to mean that which is beneficial under ideal
circumstances, but that which is actually in one's power to accomplish.
Because there is no authority higher than the sovereign of a state to
which one can appeal in suing for their rights---barring a supernatural
intervention by God---it is unrealistic to imagine any right higher than
that of a sovereign. Although one could argue that it would be more
appropriate to use the word "right" only in a normative sense so as to
avoid confusion, for the sake of Spinoza's argument, which concerns the
proper relationship between religion and politics, this usage is helpful
to remind his readers of the dangers of transferring too much power to
religious authorities under the guise of protecting one's religious
rights.

Given that there is no earthly authority higher than the sovereign of a
state which people are compelled to obey, Spinoza argues,

> Should the sovereign refuse to obey God in his revealed law, he may do
> so, but at his own peril and his own loss. No civil or natural law
> forbids him. For the civil law derives solely from his own decree,
> while natural right derives from the laws of nature, and the laws of
> nature are not accommodated to religion, which is concerned solely
> with the human good, but to the order of universal nature, that is, to
> the eternal decree of God, which is unknown to us (Spinoza 2007:
> 16.20).

Consequently, if a sovereign commands us to violate the law that God has
revealed to us, we have a responsibility to obey God only if the
revelation of his will is incontrovertible---such as if we can determine
God's will through the natural light of reason---but not otherwise.
Spinoza states that "if no one were obliged by law to obey the sovereign
power in matters that he thinks belong to religion, then the law of the
state would depend upon the different judgments and passions of each
individual person. For no one would be obligated by the law if he
considered it to be directed against his faith and superstition, and on
this pretext everyone would be able to claim license to do anything"
(Spinoza 2007: 16.21).

Spinoza therefore concludes that "the supreme right of deciding about
religion, belongs to the sovereign power, whatever decision he may make,
since it falls to him alone to preserve the rights of the state and to
protect them both by divine and by natural law" (Spinoza 2007: 16.21).
*Divine law* here refers to "the law which looks only to the supreme
good, that is, to the true knowledge and love of God" (Spinoza 2007:
4.3), while natural law refers to that which happens by natural
necessity, including anything that happens by the necessity of human
nature (Spinoza 2007: 4.1). In other words, a sovereign has the right to
decide on religious matters both through an appeal to the supreme good
and by exercising their physical power to enforce their rulings. This is
a point to which Spinoza returns in chapter 19.

## Lessons from Ancient Israel 

In chapters 17 and 18 of the *Theological-Political Treatise*, Spinoza
analyzes the history of the ancient Israelite state to determine the
reasons for its stability. He argues that prior to the emergence of the
Hebrew monarchy, the government of ancient Israel was characterized by a
separation of powers. On one side were the Levites, who were selected as
"the supreme interpreter[s] of the divine Law." Spinoza notes, "If
along with these powers [the high priest] had also possessed the right
of command, nothing would have distinguished him from an absolute
monarch." However, because the Levites were not apportioned their own
territory, they had to depend for their subsistence on the other tribes'
support, and thus they wielded no executive power. On the other side
were the remaining tribes, in whom were vested executive and military
power. After the death of Joshua, there was no supreme commander over
Israel, so that, in effect, Israel became a confederacy, with each tribe
waging wars and conducting their affairs independently of the others.
Only by virtue of their joint devotion to the Temple could they be
considered fellow citizens (Spinoza 2007: 17.11--15).

With this analysis, Spinoza identifies five reasons for the stability of
the Hebrew state. First, he notes that the because the Levites "held no
responsibility for government and had no portion [of territory] along
with the others," their "entire fortune and position depended upon a
true interpretation of the laws," with which the other tribes were
expected to familiarize themselves so they could hold the Levites
accountable. In this way, the Levites were prevented from lending the
appearance of right to their wrong actions by deliberately
misinterpreting the laws (Spinoza 2007: 17.17).

Second, Spinoza notes that because "the military was formed from the
whole body of the citizenry" and because "the leaders could not hire
foreign mercenaries," tribal leaders could not easily become despots. He
states, "it is certain that princes can oppress a people simply by
making use of a mercenary armed force, and they fear nothing more than
the liberty of their soldier-citizens, whose courage, toil and
expenditure of blood have won the state its freedom and glory." The
soldier-citizens of ancient Israel did not fight for the glory of their
leaders, but rather for the glory of God. Consequently, if any of the
tribal leaders rejected their commitment to the Israelites' common
religion and "began to violate the divine right of each person, the
others would consider him an enemy on this ground alone and rightly
suppress him" (Spinoza 2007: 17.18--19).

Third, Spinoza suggests that prophets had to be vetted by a leader, on
whose authority alone the prophet was regarded as authoritative. This
prevented the prophets from becoming populist demagogues who could
"easily draw the oppressed people to themselves, and persuade them of
whatever they wanted even by trivial signs." Rather, a prophet had to
demonstrate to the leader "whether he was of good morals, whether he had
certain and indubitable signs of his mission, and whether what he wanted
to say in God's name agreed with accepted doctrine and the common laws
of the country" (Spinoza 2007: 17.20).

Fourth, because leaders were chosen only "because of [their] age and
virtue," there were no hereditary titles of nobility whereby the
Israelite state would devolve into despotism (Spinoza 2007: 17.21).

Finally, because "the armed forces ... consisted only of citizens, and
therefore matters of war as well as of peace were handled by these same
men," the citizens of the country did not "desire war for war's sake,
but only for the sake of peace and the protection of freedom." The
citizens therefore could not be easily swayed by jingoistic demagogues
(Spinoza 2007: 17.22).

Due to the loyalty the ancient Israelite system of government instilled
among its citizens, Spinoza suggests that their state had the potential
to remain stable in perpetuity. He argues that the main reason for its
failure was that it was flawed by design. The Levites were chosen to be
the interpreters of God's law not because they were the ideal choice,
but because at Mount Sinai, "everyone but the Levites had worshipped the
golden calf." For this reason, the Levites were chosen in the place of
the first-born sons from all tribes. Spinoza remarks, "The more I ponder
this, the more I must exclaim, in Tacitus' words, that at that time 'God
did not wish to save them but to punish them'. Nor can I sufficiently
express my amazement that there was so much anger in the divine mind,
that He should actually make laws ... to avenge himself and punish them,
and thus the laws seemed not to be laws (i.e., a protection for the
people) but penalties and punishments. Everything always reminded them
of their impurity and rejection: all the gifts they were obliged to
donate to the Levites and the priests, their obligation to redeem their
first-born and pay a poll-tax in silver to the Levites, the exclusive
privilege of the Levites to approach whatever was sacred" (Spinoza 2007:
17.26).

Because of these obligations, the Israelites harbored a resentment
towards the Levites that eventually blossomed into outright rebellion.
The people demanded a king, "and thus the chief edifice of the state was
no longer the Temple but a royal court, and all the tribes were no
longer fellow citizens under the divine law and the priesthood but under
kings." For a time after the founding of the monarchy, the Levites
continued to be the sole interpreters of sacred law. However, it was not
long before the kings "permitted temples to be dedicated to other gods,
so that there might be no more consultation of the Levites." This led to
numerous civil wars between the king's partisans and those who were
faithful to the Levitical law, which contributed to the instability and
eventual downfall of the first Israelite commonwealth (Spinoza 2007:
17.29).

In chapter 18, Spinoza notes several other lessons that can be learned
from the history of the ancient Israelites. First, he notes that only
once the priests seized power in the second commonwealth (established
with the restoration of the Temple by Ezra under the Persians) did sects
emerge within Judaism. He explains that "after acquiring the power to
manage the business of government and the right of leadership, as well
as the priesthood, each of them began seeking glory for his own name in
religion and in everything else, by using priestly authority to settle
issues by every day promulgating fresh edicts about belief, ceremonies
and everything else, and by attempting to lend such rulings as much
authority as the Laws of Moses had. As a result religion degenerated
into superstition, and the true sense and interpretation of the Laws was
perverted." This superstition led to quarrels over the proper meaning of
the laws, which were further exacerbated as the magistrates took sides
in these doctrinal controversies. Consequently, the people were divided
into sectarian factions (Spinoza 2007: 18.4).

Spinoza draws two conclusions from this observation. One is that it is
"pernicious ... both for religion and the state to allow ministers of
things sacred to acquire the right to make decrees or handle the
business of government." These ministers, he argues, should not be
permitted to make dogmatic statements on any subject for which they have
not been consulted by the government; rather, they should only be
"allowed to teach and practice only what is generally received and
usual."

Spinoza's other conclusion from this observation is that it is
"dangerous ... to refer purely philosophical questions to divine law,
and to make laws about opinions which men can or do dispute." He argues
that governments that take sides on doctrinal issues not only tend to
become oppressive but effectively undermine their own power by deferring
their judgment to "a cult of which they themselves are not the heads."
Spinoza states, "Where that occurs, the authorities are not regarded as
the interpreters of divine law [i.e. the law that looks to the supreme
good] but as members of a church, that is, as people who accept the
doctors of the sect as the interpreters of divine law. In this
situation, the authority of the magistrates usually has very little
influence with the common people; rather the authority of the
theologians ... acquires overwhelming weight" (Spinoza 2007: 18.6). For
Spinoza, theology and philosophy are mutually-exclusive disciplines. The
proper domain of theology is strictly "revelation in so far as it
proclaims the purpose which we said that Scripture intends, namely the
method and manner of obedience that is the dogmas of true piety and
faith" (Spinoza 2007: 15.6). Therefore, to prevent theologians from
gaining too much power, the state should "regard piety and the practice
of religion as a question of works alone, that is, as simply the
practice of charity and justice, and to leave everyone to his own free
judgment about everything else," rather than endorsing any particular
doctrinal positions (Spinoza 2007: 18.6).

The second observation Spinoza makes concerning ancient Israel is that
whereas the prophets "had more success ... in antagonizing than
reforming people by means of the liberty which they usurped to admonish,
scold, and rebuke," the kings were more successful in their efforts at
reform because they had the power to punish people (Spinoza 2007: 18.4).
From this, he concludes that it is "necessary ... both for the state,
and for religion, to assign the authority to decide what is religiously
right or not to the sovereign power," which alone has the power to
enforce reforms (Spinoza 2007: 18.6). This is a point to which Spinoza
returns in chapter 19.

Finally, Spinoza observes that prior to the emergence of the monarchy,
the Israelites only experienced one civil war, whereas afterwards, "the
Hebrews engaged in battles of unparalleled ferocity" (Spinoza 2007:
18.4). He concludes that it is "disastrous ... for a people unaccustomed
to live under kings and already possessing settled laws, to appoint a
monarch." Conversely, however, noting the experiences of the English
civil war, when Parliamentarians beheaded King Charles I and then
promptly installed "a new monarch [i.e. Oliver Cromwell] with a
different title (as if the whole thing had been about nothing but a
title)," Spinoza argues that "it is equally dangerous to depose a
monarch, even if it is clear by every criterion that he is a tyrant,"
since those "accustomed to royal authority and held in check by it, will
despise any lesser authority and hold it in contempt" (Spinoza 2007:
18.6--8). These statements reflect Spinoza's preference for political
reform over revolution and his belief that philosophical reasoning and
persuasive political speech are more effective than violent uprisings.

## The Extent and Limits of Political Authority 

Spinoza's *Theological-Political Treatise* culminates in two arguments.
First, in chapter 19, he explains that political authorities have a
right to exercise their power over matters of public religious
observance. Second, in chapter 20, he argues that in a free state, its
citizens have a right to think and to speak freely within the limits of
obedience to the law. These conclusions establish not only the extent
and limits of sovereign power but also the political necessity of
distinguishing between the domains of philosophy and theology.

Spinoza's arguments are primarily directed against those within the
Augustinian political tradition (especially Calvinists) who distinguish
between the city or kingdom of God and the earthly city. Augustine
argued in his book *The City of God* that there are two kinds of
societies or "cities" that have coexisted with each other throughout
history. One is the city of God, which consists of the true followers of
Christ and which is most closely approximated by the Church. Only in
this city, Augustine taught, can true justice and virtue be found. The
other society is the earthly city, which, as Ernest Fortin explains, "is
characterized by its affectation of total independence and
self-sufficiency, and presents itself as the very antithesis of the life
of obedience ... and of reverence to God." These two cities, Augustine
maintained, exist in a permanent tension with one another that can only
be mitigated by the alignment of "Christian wisdom and political power."
For this alignment to occur, it is necessary for the secular state to
use its power to repress heretics and schismatics, whose actions and
beliefs not only violate the Church's teachings concerning sin and
wickedness but threaten the security of the state (Fortin 1987:
195--98).

Spinoza criticizes Augustinian political theory by reinterpreting the
notions of God's law and kingdom. He states, "a person fulfils the law
of God by practicing justice and charity at God's command, from which it
follows that a kingdom of God is a kingdom in which justice and charity
have the force of law and command." To an extent, this conception of the
kingdom of God aligns with the Augustinian view, which maintains that
the sovereign authorities ought to exercise their power in enforcing
God's law. However, Spinoza makes clear that he only conceives God's law
as consisting of charity and justice. As for how one comes to know God's
law, he adds, "I cannot see that it makes any difference here whether
God teaches and commands the true practice of justice and charity by the
natural light of reason or by revelation" (Spinoza 2007: 19.3) Thus, it
is not sufficient to justify repression by the state for a person to be
condemned by religious authorities as a heretic simply for having
different beliefs concerning the origin or form of God's law. Rather, a
person should only be deemed a criminal if they commit an offense or
injustice against someone else.

For Spinoza, justice and injustice (the definitions of which are noted
above) are only meaningful within the context of a sovereign state. It
is impossible to conceive of justice or injustice in a state of nature.
Only once people transfer their powers to the sovereign of a state is it
possible to enforce the rule that people are entitled to what belongs to
them. Since God's law is concerned primarily with justice, it is
therefore only effectual insofar as the state is empowered to enforce
it. "We conclude, therefore, absolutely, that religion, whether revealed
by the natural light of reason or by prophetic light, receives the force
of a commandment solely from the decree of those who have authority to
govern, and that God has no special kingdom over men except through
those who hold power." Moreover, sovereign authorities are not merely
the enforcers of God's law, but the interpreters of it, since "divine
teachings, whether revealed by natural or by prophetic light,
necessarily acquire the force of a decree not directly from God, but
from those who exercise the right of governing and issue edicts or by
their mediation. Hence, we can only conceive of God ruling over men and
directing human affairs in accordance with justice and equity as
effected by their mediation" (Spinoza 2007: 19.4--8). Spinoza thus
rejects the Augustinian notion that there is a city of God distinct from
the earthly city. These "cities," in his view, are one and the same.

Spinoza argues that because the purpose of a state is to guarantee the
security of its citizens, "the people's safety is the supreme law to
which all other laws both human and divine must be accommodated." The
sovereign of a state has the sole duty of determining "what is necessary
for the security of the whole people and of the state" and to promulgate
whatever laws are necessary to attain that security, including laws that
"lay down how a person should behave with piety towards their neighbor,
that is, to determine how one is obliged to obey God," since obedience
to God consists of piety towards one's neighbor. Only the sovereign of a
state has the ability to determine what is in the common interest of its
citizens and therefore to decide what constitutes piety (Spinoza 2007:
19.10--11). Consequently, sacred matters (i.e. the determination of what
behaviors constitute piety) remain under sovereign jurisdiction. "No one
has the right and power without [the sovereign's] authority or
consent, to administer sacred matters or choose ministers, or decide and
establish the foundations and doctrines of a church, nor may they
[without that consent] give judgments about morality and observance of
piety, or excommunicate or receive anyone into the church, or care for
the poor" (Spinoza 2007: 19.15).

However, despite the extensive power that sovereign authorities have
over matters of piety and religion, Spinoza argues that they are not
capable of preventing people from using their own reason to make moral
judgments. Although a sovereign might try to violently suppress those
who hold dissenting views on religious matters, it is not reasonable
that a sovereign should do this. "Indeed," Spinoza claims, "rulers
cannot do such things without great risk to their whole government, and
hence we can also deny that they have absolute power to do these and
similar things and consequently that they possess any complete right to
do them." Likewise, because people tend to speak their minds, a
government cannot suppress free speech without becoming excessively
violent and thereby risking its legitimacy (Spinoza 2007: 20.3--4).

The purpose of a state, Spinoza argues, is to secure people's freedom
from fear, not to reduce them to beasts or automata. When people, in the
state of nature, consent to transfer their power to a sovereign, they
only transfer their power of action, not their freedoms of thought and
speech. If they have dissenting opinions, they can voice them while
remaining obedient to the law. Only if "they make use of this freedom to
accuse the magistrate of wrongdoing and render him odious to the common
people or make a seditious attempt to abolish the law against the
magistrate's will" can they rightly be labeled an agitator or rebel
(Spinoza 2007: 20.7).

Spinoza maintains that the only truly subversive opinions are those
which, in merely being expressed, dissolve the agreement by which a
person surrenders their right to the sovereign. This includes any
opinion stating that a sovereign does not have an autonomous right or
that people should live according to their own judgments (Spinoza 2007:
20.9). In any other situation, though, people should be permitted to
speak their minds without fear of retaliation by the authorities. Though
there are disadvantages for sovereigns in allow people to express their
ideas freely, Spinoza states, "Trying to control everything by laws will
encourage vices rather than correcting them. Things which cannot be
prevented must necessarily be allowed, even though they are often
harmful" (Spinoza 2007: 20.10).

Even if a sovereign does attempt to compel people to accept certain
doctrines, they do so at their own peril, because those who have moral
integrity and virtue will always resist. Of course, Spinoza
acknowledges, there will always be people who prefer to follow their own
opinions, even if they have no integrity. A sovereign that attempts to
control its citizens does not ultimately succeed in preventing these
people from disobeying, but to the contrary, it only harms those who are
well-meaning (Spinoza 2007: 20.11).

Moreover, if a sovereign sides with a religious faction by enforcing
their particular moral doctrines, it undermines its own authority.
"Those who believe doctrines condemned by law to be true will be unable
to obey while those who reject them as false will celebrate edicts
condemning them as their own special privileges and glory in them so
that the sovereign will be powerless to abolish such edicts afterwards
even should he wish to" (Spinoza 2007: 20.12).

In conclusion, Spinoza summarizes his argument for the sovereign's
protection of free thought as follows:

> [W]e have proven that not only may this liberty [of saying what one
> thinks] be granted without risk to the peace of the republic and to
> piety as well as the authority of the sovereign power, but also that
> to conserve all of this such freedom must be granted. For when,
> contrary to this, efforts are made to strip men of this liberty, and
> those with dissenting views are summoned to court (albeit not for
> their inner thoughts which alone could offend), then an example is
> made of honest men which is viewed rather as martyrdom [than
> justified punishment]. This antagonizes rather than frightens people,
> and moves them to compassion, or even incites them to take revenge.
> Finally, upright dealing and trust are undermined, flatterers and
> traitors are encouraged, and the foes [of those with dissenting
> views] triumph, since their indignation has been surrendered to: they
> have turned the sovereign powers into adherents of their dogmas of
> which they are recognized as the interpreters. As a consequence, they
> dare usurp the authority and right of the high officers of the state
> and are not ashamed to boast that they have been directly appointed by
> God and that their own decrees are divine whereas those of the
> sovereign authorities are merely human ones and, accordingly, they
> then require that sovereigns should defer to these divine---that is to
> say their own---decrees. No one can fail to see that all this is
> utterly destructive of the common good of the republic (Spinoza 2007:
> 20.16).

---

### Citation Notes

Rather than citing Spinoza's works by page number, I am citing Spinoza's
*Theological-Political Treatise* by chapter and paragraph (e.g.,
paragraph 10 of chapter 14 is cited as 14.10) and Spinoza's *Ethics* by
chapter and proposition (e.g., proposition 7 of chapter 3 is cited as
3P7). Likewise, I cite Wittgenstein's *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus*
by proposition number. The following abbreviations are used in my
citations of Spinoza's *Ethics*: A = axiom; App = appendix item; C =
corollary; D = definition; P = proposition; and S = scholium. In my
citations of Spinoza's *Theological-Political Treatise*, "SN" refers to
the supplementary notes that Spinoza subsequently added to the margins
of his own copy.

### Bibliography

Fortin, Ernest L., "St. Augustine," in Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey,
*History of Political Philosophy* (3rd ed.) (Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press, 1987).

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Jonathan Israel, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Jonathan Israel), *Theological-Political Treatise* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007).

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Matthew J. Kisner, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Matthew J. Kisner), *Ethics Proved in Geometrical Order* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2018).

Wittgenstein, Ludwig (tr. C. K. Ogden), *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus*
(Mineola, NY: Dover, 1999).
