---
title: Spinoza on the Emotions and Virtue (Part 2)
layout: post
---

*This is Part 2 in a two-part series in which I will examine Benedict de
Spinoza's definitions and evaluations of common emotions in the*
Ethics*.*

*For an introduction to Spinoza's conception of God, which is referenced
in this article, see my previous article "[Spinoza on Faith versus
Philosophy]({% post_url 2023-05-03-spinoza-on-faith-versus-philosophy %})."*

## Hope and Fear, Assurance and Despair, Relief and Remorse 

Spinoza defines *hope* as "uncertain joy arising from the idea of
something in the future or in the past about whose outcome we are to
some extent in doubt" (3DOE12). Conversely, he defines *fear* as
"uncertain sadness arising from the idea of something in the future or
in the past about whose outcome we are to some extent in doubt"
(3DOE13). He explains,

> It follows from these definitions that there is no hope without fear
> nor fear without hope. For anyone who depends upon hope and is in
> doubt about the outcome of a thing, is supposed to be imagining
> something that excludes the existence of a future thing, and therefore
> to that extent he is saddened (by 3P19), and consequently, so long as
> he depends upon hope, he is supposed to fear that the thing may
> happen. Conversely anyone who is in fear, i.e. is doubtful about the
> outcome of a thing he hates, is also imagining something that excludes
> the existence of the thing, and therefore (by 3P20) he is joyful, and
> consequently to that extent he has hope that it may not happen.

Spinoza states, "Once the doubt is taken away from these emotions, hope
turns into *assurance* and fear into *despair* (3P18S2). That is,
"Assurance is joy arising from the idea of something in the future or in
the past about which the cause to have doubts has been taken away"
(3DOE14), and conversely, "Despair is sadness arising from the idea of
something in the future or in the past about which the cause to have
doubts about it has also been taken away" (3DOE15).

Spinoza defines *relief* as "joy accompanied by the idea of something in
the past that came to pass contrary to expectation" (3DOE16).
Conversely, he defines *remorse* as "sadness accompanied by the idea of
something in the past that came to pass contrary to expectation"
(3DOE17).

Because there are no emotions of hope and fear without sadness, hope and
fear are not good in themselves (4P47). Rather, they "indicate a failure
of cognition and the mind's lack of power." Moreover, "assurance,
despair, relief and remorse are also signs of a powerless spirit," since
although assurance and relief are joyful emotions, they are necessarily
preceded by sadness (4P47S).

## Pride, Adulation, Contempt, and Abjection 

Because we endeavor to affirm that we and the things we love are
affected with joy rather than sadness (3P25), and that things we hate
are affected with sadness rather than joy (3P26), we tend to think too
well of ourselves and of those we love, and too poorly of those we hate
(3P26S). Spinoza defines *pride* as the tendency "to think too well of
oneself out of love of oneself" (3DOE28); *adulation* as the tendency
"to think too well of another person out of love" (3DOE21); and
*contempt* or *disdain* as the tendency "to think too poorly of another
person out of hatred" (3DOE22).

Spinoza notes that pride has no opposite, since "no one thinks too
poorly of himself because of self-hatred" or "because he imagines that
he cannot do something or other" (3DOE28). A person cannot bring it
about that they are saddened by themselves, thus one's hatred cannot be
accurately directed towards themselves. It is only on the basis of
*imagination* or *opinion* that a person believes that they are the
cause of their own sadness (for the definitions of these terms, see my
article "[Spinoza on the Prophetic Imagination and Religious
Authority]({% post_url 2023-05-05-spinoza-on-the-prophetic-imagination-and-religious-authority %})").
Spinoza calls this attitude *abjection*, noting that "as pride arises
from self-contentment, so abjection arises from humility." (See below
for the definitions of *self-contentment* and *humility*.) Specifically,
he defines abjection as the tendency "to think too poorly of oneself out
of sadness" (3DOE29).

People generally oppose pride to humility because they "are focusing
more on their effects than on their nature." In any case, as Spinoza
argues, "these emotions---humility and abjection---are very rare. Human
nature, considered in itself, struggles against them as much as possible
(see 3P15 and 3P54). Therefore those who are most believed to be abject
and humble are usually the most ambitious and envious" (see the
definitions of ambition and envy below).

Spinoza states that adulation and contempt are always bad because they
are not based on reason (4P48). Moreover, adulation tends to make the
one to whom it is directed proud (4P49). Extreme pride and abjection are
also bad because they are not based on a correct understanding of
oneself (4P55). Because they are based on an extreme ignorance of
oneself, they "indicate extreme powerlessness of spirit," since one is
only empowered by having an adequate knowledge of themselves (4P56).
Because they are easily affected, the proud and the abject are "the most
subject to emotions" (4P56C). Proud people tend to love the presence of
flatterers and parasites and to hate the presence of generous people
(4P57). They are also envious, since they hate those who are praised for
their virtues.

Although abjection is the opposite of pride, their behaviors are
effectively similar. When an abject person contemplates others' faults,
they rejoice, and when they believe they are inferior to others, they
are saddened. "This is why none are more prone to envy than abject
persons; and this is why they particularly endeavor to watch other
people's doings in order to criticize them rather than reform them, and
that in the end the only thing they praise is abjection, which they
glory in though in such a way that they still seem abject" (4P57).

## Pity, Compassion, Emulation, and Benevolence 

Because images of things are affections of the human body whose ideas
represent external bodies as present to our senses, if an external
body's nature is similar to the nature of our own bodies, then "the idea
of the external body that we imagine will involve an affection of our
body similar to the external body's affection." Therefore, if we imagine
that an external body similar to us has been affected by some emotion,
we will be affected by a similar emotion (3P27).

Moreover, if we hate something similar to us, we will be affected by an
emotion contrary to the one we imagine affects them. That is, if we
imagine that something we hate is affected by sadness, we will be joyful
because to the extent that something is affected by sadness, it is
destroyed; and conversely, if we imagine that something we hate is
affected by joy, we will be sad because we imagine its passage to a
greater perfection to be an impediment to our own essential endeavor
(3P23).

The imitation of emotions that Spinoza describes in 3P27 could be called
*sympathy*. In 3P27S, he defines *pity* as the "imitation of emotions
[when it] is related to sadness" and *emulation* as the imitation of
emotions when it is related to desire. In other words, "Pity is sadness
accompanied by the idea of bad things happening to someone else whom we
imagine to be similar to ourselves" (3DOE18), and "Emulation is a desire
for something that arises in us from our imagining that others have the
same desire" (3DOE33). Spinoza explains, "There seems to be no
difference between pity and compassion except perhaps that pity refers
to a single instance of the emotion, compassion to a habit of pity"
(3DOE18, explanation). That is, "Compassion is love insofar as it
affects a person in such a way that he enjoys another person's good but
is saddened by harm to him" (3DOE24).

Compassion is often contrasted with *envy*, which "is hatred insofar as
it affects a person in such a way that he is saddened by another
person's happiness but takes pleasure in harm to him" (3DOE23). Envy is
often associated with emulation because when we imagine that someone
enjoys something that only one person can possess, we will love that
thing ourselves and desire to enjoy it, and consequently we will
endeavor to ensure that another person does not possess it (3P32).
Spinoza notes, "We see therefore that it is largely the natural tendency
of human beings to pity those who are doing badly and to envy those who
are doing well, and (3P32) to hate them all the more, the more they love
the thing they imagine the other person possessing. Then, from the same
property of human nature from which it follows that people are
compassionate, we see that it also follows that they are envious and
ambitious." Specifically, sympathy is the basis of pity, compassion,
emulation, and envy (3P32S).

Because envy arises from hatred, it is necessarily bad (4P45C1).
Likewise, "pity is bad in itself and useless," because it is a sadness
(4P50). Spinoza states, "The good that follows from [pity], namely
that we endeavor to liberate the person we pity from misery (by 3P27C3),
we desire to do solely because of the command of reason (by 4P37)." He
adds, "It follows from this that a person living by the dictate of
reason endeavors as much as he can not to be touched by pity" (4P50C),
since "anyone who is easily touched by the emotion of pity and is moved
by another person's misery or tears often does an action that he later
repents, both because we do no action that we certainly know is good as
a result of an emotion and because we are easily deceived by false
tears" (4P50S). Compassion and emulation are therefore bad if they are
motivated by pity or envy; they are only good if they are motivated by
reason.

Spinoza notes three corollaries of 3P27. First, he states that we will
be affected with love for a person who affects something similar to us
with joy if we have not previously been affected by an emotion towards
that person; and conversely, we will be affected with hatred for a
person who affects something similar to us with sadness. Second, because
the misery of something we pity affects us with sadness, we cannot hate
that thing. Finally, we will endeavor to relieve the misery of something
we pity. In 3P27C3S, Spinoza defines *benevolence* as the "will *or*
appetite to confer a benefit, which arises from our pity for the thing
we want to benefit." In other words, it "is a desire to benefit someone
we pity" (3DOE35).

## Benevolence and Malevolence, Timidity and Cowardice 

We desire that whatever we imagine contributes to joy exists and is
present. Since the mind's endeavor or power of thought is equal and
simultaneous with the body's endeavor or power of exerting itself, we
therefore endeavor to cause what we imagine contributes to joy to exist
and to be present. Conversely, we endeavor to cause what we imagine
contributes to sadness to be destroyed (3P28).

Moreover, we will endeavor to destroy one whom we hate unless we fear
the outcome will be something sadder or worse for ourselves. Conversely,
we will endeavor to benefit one whom we love unless we fear the outcome
will be sadder or worse for ourselves (3P39).

In 3P39S, Spinoza defines *timidity* as "the emotion by which a person
is of a disposition to refuse what he wants and to accept what he does
not want." In other words, "Timidity is the desire to avert a greater
evil which we fear by means of a lesser evil" (3DOE39). *Modesty* is a
form of timidity in which the person is of a disposition to avoid shame.
*Consternation* is a form of timidity in which one is uncertain as to
which bad thing they ought to avoid over the other. That is,
"Consternation is said of someone whose desire to avoid something bad is
restrained by his wonder at the bad thing that he fears" (3DOE42).

Spinoza states that consternation is "a species of cowardice," which "is
said of a person whose desire is restrained by fear of a danger that his
peers dare to face" (3DOE41). He explains,

> But because consternation arises from a double form of timidity, it is
> better defined as a *fear which gets such a grip on a stupefied or
> wavering person that he cannot rid himself of the bad thing*. I say
> *stupefied*, because we understand that his desire to get rid of the
> bad thing is restrained by his wonder at it. I add *wavering*, because
> our supposition is that this desire is restrained by timidity in the
> face of another bad thing which torments him equally. The result is
> that he does not know which of the two he should get rid of.

Timidity in its various forms is not necessarily bad, provided that one
acts in accordance with reason. Spinoza states, "The virtue of a free
person is seen to be equally great in declining dangers as in overcoming
them" (4P69). He adds, "For a free person therefore timely flight and
fighting are equally ascribed to great spiritedness, *or* a free person
chooses flight with the same spiritedness *or* presence of mind as he
chooses conflict" (4P69C). By *spiritedness*, Spinoza means "the desire
by which everyone endeavors to preserve his own being by the dictate of
reason alone" (3P59S).

## Courage, Ambition, and Human Kindness 

Spinoza defines *courage* as "the desire by which a person is prompted
to do something dangerous that his peers are afraid to try" (3DOE40).
Since ambition is a form of desire, courage can be based on ambition if
it prompts a person to take risks.

Spinoza provides three interrelated definitions of ambition. First, he
defines *ambition* as the "endeavor to do actions and also to omit doing
them simply in order to please people ... especially when we make such
an immense endeavor to please the crowd that as a result we do or omit
to do actions to our own or someone else's detriment" (3P29S). He
contrasts this endeavor with *human kindness* or *consideration*, which
"is a desire to do things that please people and not to do things that
displease them" (3DOE43) without necessarily causing any detriment to
ourselves or others.

Second, Spinoza defines *ambition* as the "endeavor to make everyone
approve of what one loves or hates oneself," since it involves a desire
to cause "other people to live in conformance with [one's] own
character" (3P31S).

Finally, he defines *ambition* as "an immoderate desire of glory"
(3DOE44). *Glory*, in turn, is "joy accompanied by the idea of some
action of our own that we imagine others praise" (3DOE30). Spinoza
notes, "Ambition is a desire by which all the emotions (by 3P27 and
3P31) are nurtured and strengthened; and therefore this emotion can
hardly be surpassed. As long as a person is in the grip of some desire,
he is necessarily in the grip of this desire at the same time" (3DOE44,
explanation).

Because ambition is excessive, it is bad (4P44S). However, the endeavor
to procure for other people what one loves and considers good for
themselves is not necessarily bad, provided that one acts according to
reason (4P37S1). Spinoza explains in 5P4S,

> [H]uman nature is so constituted, that everyone wants other people
> to live in conformance with his own character (see 3P31S). And this
> appetite in a person who is not led by reason is a passion; it is
> called ambition and it does not differ very much from pride. By
> contrast in a person who lives by the dictate of reason, it is an
> action *or* a virtue, and it is called piety (see 4P37S1 and 4P37,
> alternative proof). In this manner all appetites *or* desires are
> merely passions insofar as they arise from inadequate ideas; and they
> are accounted virtue when they are aroused or generated from adequate
> ideas.

The behaviors associated with ambition, such as the desire to please
others, the desire to convert them to our causes, and the courage it may
arouse, can therefore be virtuous if one acts from adequate ideas rather
than from passions or inadequate ideas.

## Humility, Self-Contentment, and Repentance 

Because different people may be affected differently by the same object,
and because the same person may be affected differently by the same
object at different times (3P51), "it may happen that one person may
hate what another person loves; and that one person may fear what
another does not; and that one and the same person now loves what he
previously hated and now dares to do what he was afraid to do before,
etc." Consequently, people can vary as much in judgment as in emotion,
because they tend to judge what is good by their emotions. Moreover,
because one's emotions are often based on imaginary causes, "a person
can often be the cause of his own sadness as much as of his own joy"
(3P51S).

Spinoza defines *self-contentment* as "the joy that arises from a
person's thinking about himself and his own power of action" (3DOE25)
and *repentance* as "sadness accompanied by the idea of some deed which
we believe we did by a free decision of the mind" (3DOE27). *Humility*
is distinguished from repentance only insofar as it does not necessarily
involve the idea that we did something by a free decision of the mind.
Spinoza defines humility as "the sadness that arises from a person's
thinking about his own lack of power *or* weakness" (3DOE26). "This
sadness," he notes, "is very much fostered, if a person imagines himself
as blamed by other people" (3P55C). He suggests that the joy which
arises from thinking about ourselves positively, which is called
*self-love* or self-contentment, "is restored whenever a person thinks
about his own virtues *or* his power of action." This especially happens
when a person imagines that their actions distinguish them from others
and thereby make them special. "He will not be so glad if what he
affirms of himself belongs to the universal idea of a human being or an
animal." When people are saddened by comparing themselves with others,
they will therefore try "to get rid of this sadness (by 3P28) by
misinterpreting the actions of [their] peers or by embellishing
[their] own as much as possible" (3P55S).

Spinoza argues that the highest form of self-contentment is that which
arises from reason, by which a person adequately perceives what follows
from their own power of action (4P52). He states, "Self-contentment is
truly the highest thing we can hope for," since no one endeavors to
persevere in their being for any purpose outside themselves. He adds
that self-contentment is strengthened by praise and diminished by blame
(4P52S).

Conversely, Spinoza argues that neither humility nor repentance are
virtues, since they are both forms of sadness, and that they do not
arise from reason, since those who adequately understand themselves will
not be saddened by their lack of power (4P53--54). Nevertheless,
although repentance is not virtuous, Spinoza acknowledges, "Because
human beings rarely live by the dictate of reason, these two emotions of
humility and repentance, as well as hope and fear, are more useful than
detrimental." If everyone was excessively proud, then their discord
could not be kept in check. "This is why it is not surprising that the
Prophets, who looked not to what was useful for the few but for the
community, so strongly recommended humility, repentance and reverence.
And in truth people who are subject to these passions can be induced
more easily than others to live in the end under the command of reason,
i.e. to be free and to enjoy the life of blessed people" (4P54S). (This
is why Spinoza advocates repentance and reverence for God in his tenets
of universal faith, discussed in my article "[Spinoza on the Prophetic
Imagination and Religious
Authority]({% post_url 2023-05-05-spinoza-on-the-prophetic-imagination-and-religious-authority %}).")
In recommending reverence, the prophets developed notions of sacredness
and profanity, which differ among cultures because people are affected
in different ways, even by the same things (3DOE27).

## Concord and Fortitude in a Commonwealth 

A person who is led by reason is not led to obey by fear. Rather,
insofar as they endeavor to persevere in their being---that is, to live
freely---they desire others' good, and therefore they desire to sustain
the community by doing what is useful to it. Thus a person who is led by
reason desires to keep the common laws of the commonwealth so that they
may live freely (4P73).

In 4P73S, Spinoza defines *fortitude* as "spiritedness and generosity"
and suggests that it is related to the liberty that a person experiences
in a commonwealth. A person who has fortitude is never affected by
hatred and the other emotions based on it. Rather, they overcome hatred
by responding in love (4P46). Moreover, a person who has fortitude
recognizes that "whatever he finds troublesome and bad, everything that
appears impious, horrifying, unjust and base, arises from his conceiving
the things themselves in a disturbed, mutilated and confused fashion."
Therefore, "he endeavors above all to conceive things as they are in
themselves and to remove the impediments to true cognition," such as the
negative emotions associated with hatred, and instead "to act well and
be joyful."

A person of fortitude does these things because they recognize that
there is nothing more useful to them than to belong to a society in
which others live by the command of reason. There is therefore nothing
more noble than for a person to educate others in how to live by
reason's dictates (4App9). This involves educating people concerning the
reasons for their negative emotions, by which they are brought into
conflict with others (4App10). To live by the command of reason, Spinoza
argues, requires skill and vigilance, since those who do so must avoid
emulating the emotions of those who are more inclined to live by envy
and vengeance than by generosity. Many people "know better how to
denounce human beings and rebuke their vices rather than to teach
virtues, and do not know how to strengthen people's spirits but only how
to break them," and are therefore "troublesome both to themselves and
others" (4App13). Nevertheless, we must live among others. We ought not
escape to the wilderness due to "excessive sensitivity of spirit and a
false zeal for religion." Rather, we should be equanimous towards those
who commit offenses against us and should seek to preserve concord and
friendship (4App14).

Spinoza states, "The things that generate concord are related to
justice, equity, and honor." Moreover, the things that are "necessary
for fostering love are things that pertain to religion and piety"
(4App15). Spinoza summarizes the behaviors and emotions that either
augment or diminish the concord among people in a commonwealth:

1.  Concord often arises from fear. However, this sort of concord is not
    accompanied by mutual trust. Moreover, fear arises from
    powerlessness of spirit and is therefore contrary to reason (4P47,
    4App16).
2.  Pity, while seeming pious, also arises from powerlessness of spirit
    and is therefore contrary to reason (4P50, 4App16).
3.  Although people's hearts are won by openhandedness, it is impossible
    for any single individual to care for the poor and to thereby unite
    people in friendship. Therefore, the responsibility of caring for
    the poor falls on the entire community. Moreover, care must be taken
    in accepting benefits and showing gratitude (4P17S, 4P71S,
    4App17--18).
4.  The forms of love that are based on anything other than freedom of
    spirit, such as lust, easily pass into hatred and are therefore a
    source of potential discord. Marriage, for instance, is best if the
    love between partners is based on freedom of spirit (4App19--20; see
    3P38).
5.  Flattery creates concord, but only through servitude and insincerity
    and at the risk of causing people to become more proud, which
    creates discord (4P57, 4App21).
6.  Although it seems to be pious because it is contrary to pride,
    abjection has similar effects to pride, and is therefore a source of
    discord (4P57S, 4App22).
7.  Concord often arises from shame. However, not only does shame only
    arise when secrets cannot be concealed, but it is a form of sadness
    and is therefore contrary to reason (4P58S, 4App23).
8.  The other forms of sadness also cause discord since they are opposed
    to justice, equity, honor, and true piety and religion (4P41,
    4App24).
9.  Although it seems to be concerned with equity, indignation causes
    discord when everyone is allowed to pass judgment on others and to
    thereby vindicate their own behaviors and rights (4P51S, 4App24).
10. If consideration for others arises from reason, it is pious.
    However, if it arises from an emotion, it is ambition, which causes
    discord and sedition by arousing others' envy. A considerate person
    motivated by reason will strive for others to have the good they
    desire for themselves. They will not boast of their own
    accomplishments, nor will they gossip about others' vices. Rather,
    they will speak generously of others' virtues (4P37S1, 4P44S,
    4App25).

## Remedies for the Emotions 

To educate people in reason, Spinoza finds it necessary to teach others
how to remedy their negative emotions. He argues that "the power of the
mind over the emotions" consists in five elements (5P20S).

First, the mind's power over the emotions consists in *"*cognition of
the emotions itself*"* (5P4S). Spinoza argues that there is no affection
of the body of which we cannot form a clear and distinct conception,
since things which are common to all can be conceived adequately (by
2P38) and since all bodies agree in certain things (by 2L2), such as
that their minds perceive them in their entirety (2P12). Therefore there
is no affection of the body (such as an emotion) of which we cannot form
a clear and distinct conception (5P4). By forming a clear and distinct
conception of their emotions, a person can separate them from the
thoughts of external causes and connect them with true thoughts (i.e. a
true understanding of their causes). In this way, potentially harmful
emotions are destroyed (by 5P2) and the appetites or desires that arise
from them are unable to become excessive (by 4P61). There is no better
remedy for the emotions than this, since the only power of the mind is
its ability to think and to form adequate ideas (by 3P3).

Second, the mind's power over the emotions consists in "the fact that
[the mind] separates the emotions from the thought of an external
cause which we imagine in a confused way" (5P2, 5P4S).

Third, it consists in "the time, by which the affections related to
things that we understand surpass those which are related to things that
we conceive in a confused or mutilated fashion" (5P7). Spinoza explains
that we only regard something that has affected us as absent when the
body is subsequently affected by something else that excludes its
existence (by 2P17). Thus the emotion associated with it can only be
restrained by emotions associated with those things that exclude its
existence (by 4P9). Since an emotion that arises from reason is
associated with the common properties of a thing (see 2P40S2), which we
always regard as present (since nothing excludes their existence), it
always remains the same, and emotions that are contrary to it and are
not sustained by their own external causes will have to continually
adapt themselves to it until they are no longer contrary. Therefore, an
emotion arising from reason is more powerful than those related to
particular things we regard as absent. Nonetheless, it takes time for us
to cultivate the emotions that arise from reason (namely, spiritedness
and generosity), because it takes time for us to develop an
understanding of the common properties of things.

Fourth, the mind's power over the emotions consists in "the very many
causes which foster the affections related to the common properties of
things or to God" (5P9, 5P11). Spinoza maintains that emotions are
harmful insofar as they impede the mind's ability to think or to reason
(by 4P26--27). An emotion that determines the mind to think of many
objects simultaneously is therefore less harmful than an equally great
emotion that determines the mind to think of only a small number of
things, because the former is nonetheless accompanied by a greater
understanding than the latter. Moreover, because the mind's essence or
power consists in thought alone, it is less acted on by an emotion which
determines it to think of many objects simultaneously than by one that
determines it to think of only a small number of things. Finally, the
more external causes with which an emotion is associated, the lesser the
emotion exists in relation to each one (by 3P48). In other words, the
more things to which an image or an emotion is related, the more causes
there are that can arouse it. Therefore, because the emotion occurs more
frequently (as the result of its multiple potential causes), the more it
occupies the mind (by 5P8), and the more that the mind can be affected
in such a way that its understanding improves.

Finally, the mind's power over the emotions consists "in the order by
which the mind is able to order and connect its emotions with each
other" (5P10S, 5P12--14). Spinoza demonstrates that things that we
clearly and distinctly understand are either the common properties of
things themselves or deductions from them (by 2P40S2), and consequently
the emotions associated with them are more frequently elicited in us (by
5P11). Therefore, images of things are more easily joined with images
related to the things we clearly and distinctly understand than with
other things (by 2P18). Moreover, the more things with which an image is
associated, the more often it is elicited, since there are more causes
that can elicit it (by 2P18). Since there is no affection of the body of
which the mind cannot form a clear and distinct idea (by 5P4), the mind
can ensure that the affections of the body or the images of things are
related to the idea of God (by 1P15). Thus it is possible for the mind
to order and connect its emotions with each other.

According to Spinoza, we are not easily affected by bad emotions if we
cultivate our ability to rightly order and connect the affections of the
body, since greater force is required to restrain emotions which are
ordered in accordance with reason than those that are affected by causes
outside our control. He argues, "The best thing we can achieve
therefore, so long as we do not have perfect cognition of our emotions,
is to conceive a right manner of living *or* sure tenets of life and to
commit them to memory and apply them constantly to particular situations
that often meet us in life, so that they may have a broad effect on our
imagination and always be at hand for us." We must meditate on these
tenets so that we can easily recall them in moments in which we are
affected by negative emotions. Moreover, "in ordering our thoughts and
imaginings we must always focus (by 4P63C and 3P59) on what is good in
each thing, so that we may be determined always to act from an emotion
of joy." For instance, if a person tends to be ambitious, they should
not focus on its faults, but on its right use (5P10S).

In 5P20S, Spinoza argues "that sicknesses of spirit and misfortune
mostly have their origin in an excessive love for something that is
subject to many changes and that we can never control." It is this sort
of love, in particular, that he regards as necessary for us to destroy
if we are to attain blessedness. "We can easily conceive from this
therefore what clear and distinct cognition can do in the face of the
emotions, especially the third kind of cognition," namely intuition
(which I discussed in my article "[Spinoza on the Prophetic Imagination
and Religious
Authority]({% post_url 2023-05-05-spinoza-on-the-prophetic-imagination-and-religious-authority %})").
Even if clear and distinct cognition does not absolutely destroy
excessive love for things outside our control, it can at least prevent
them from occupying too much of our mind. Spinoza states, "There is no
affection of the body which the mind cannot form a clear and distinct
concept of (by 5P4); and therefore it can ensure (by 1P15) that they are
all related to the idea of God" (5P14), since knowledge of effects
depend on knowledge of their causes (1A4) and since God is the cause of
everything that exists. From this, it follows that because a clear and
distinct understanding of oneself produces joy, (since the mind thereby
recognizes its power of action) and because this joy "is accompanied by
the idea of God," a person who has a clear and distinct understanding of
themselves necessarily loves God (since love is defined as joy
accompanied by the thought of an external cause, which in this case is
God) (5P15). Therefore, clear and distinct cognition (particularly
intuition) generates a love for God which is "tainted by none of the
faults that there are in ordinary love" and which can enable us to
overcome our misplaced love by "occupy[ing] the greatest part of the
mind" and thereby precluding our harmful emotions.

---

### Citation Notes

Rather than citing Spinoza's *Ethics* by page number, I am citing it by
chapter and proposition (e.g., proposition 7 of chapter 3 is cited as
3P7). The following abbreviations are used in my citations of
Spinoza's *Ethics*: A = axiom; App = appendix item; C = corollary; D =
definition; DOE = definition of emotion (at the end of book 3); L =
lemma; P = proposition; and S = scholium.

### Bibliography

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Matthew J. Kisner, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Matthew J. Kisner), *Ethics Proved in Geometrical Order* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2018).
