---
title: Spinoza on Faith versus Philosophy
layout: post
---

*This is Part 1 of a two-part series in which I will examine the
relationship between faith and philosophy as it was conceived by the
seventeenth-century philosopher Benedict de Spinoza. In this part, I
will introduce Spinoza's conception of faith and his seven tenets of
universal faith.*

## Faith and Obedience 

In his *Theological-Political Treatise*, Benedict de Spinoza
distinguishes between *autonomous* and *heteronomous* approaches to
ethics and politics. The former approach involves one's determining for
themselves how they ought to live on the basis of their reason, without
reference to external sources of moral authority. The latter, by
contrast, involves one's deference to external moral authorities. Among
the ways Spinoza sees this dichotomy exemplified is in the distinction
between *heteronomous faith*, which involves obedience to a special
revelation of God's transcendent will, and *autonomous reason*, which
involves the cultivation of personal virtue by understanding God's
general self-revelation through nature. In making this distinction,
Spinoza defines *faith* as the act of "acknowledging certain things
about God, ignorance of which makes obedience towards him impossible and
which are necessarily found wherever obedience is met with" (Spinoza
2007: 14.5). He explains this definition of faith by examining several
of its implications.

First, Spinoza emphasizes that "faith does not lead to salvation in
itself, but only by means of obedience." He cites James 2:17 in support
of this claim: "faith in itself, if it has no works, is dead." That is,
faith only enables us to attain salvation because of the good works it
produces within us, which enable us to live in accordance with the same
virtue that is produced in us through reason (Spinoza 2007: 14.6).

Second, Spinoza notes that "whoever is truly obedient necessarily
possesses the true faith which leads to salvation." Again, he quotes
James: "Show me your faith apart from your works, and I by my works will
show you my faith" (2:18). Given that a person exemplifies faith only
insofar as they produce good works, what one believes is not as decisive
in determining whether a person is faithful as how one acts. Spinoza
also quotes 1 John 4:13 to argue that the essence of these good works is
love: "By this we know that we abide in [God] and he in us, because he
has given us of his Spirit." He interprets this Spirit not as a distinct
person of the Trinity, but as God's love, since as John states in verse
7, "everyone who loves is born of God and knows God." Spinoza thus
concludes that "because no one has seen God, ... no one recognizes God
or is aware of him other than through love of his neighbor, and hence
... the only attribute of God that anyone can know is this love, so far
as we share in it." Moreover, he argues, "the true antichrists are those
who persecute honest men and lovers of justice because they differ from
them in doctrine and do not adhere to the same tenets of beliefs as
themselves. For we know that those who love justice and charity are
faithful by this measure alone, and he who persecutes the faithful is an
antichrist" (Spinoza 2007: 14.7).

Finally, Spinoza states that "faith requires not so much true as pious
dogmas, that is, such tenets as move the mind to obedience, even though
many of these may not have a shadow of truth in them. What matters is
that the person who embraces them does not realize that they are
false---otherwise, he is necessarily in revolt against [true piety]."
His definition of faith therefore does not insist on the objective truth
of a doctrine's claims. Rather, a doctrine is primarily valuable insofar
as it "confirm[s] the mind in love towards our neighbor" (Spinoza
2007: 14.8).

Given this definition of faith, which first and foremost requires that
we treat others tolerantly in love, Spinoza proceeds to identify several
tenets of a "universal faith" that he believes is necessary for a
state's citizens to affirm if they are to live in harmony despite having
differing views on doctrinal specifics. These tenets of universal faith,
he states, must satisfy the criterion that they contain no teachings
that would be controversial among honest people, but only "those that
are absolutely required for obedience to God, ignorance of which makes
obedience quite impossible" (Spinoza 2007: 14.9). Because the purpose of
these tenets is to induce to obedience those who do not act virtuously
on the basis of their own autonomous reason, they should not be
construed as necessary for reason, except insofar as they preserve the
social conditions necessary for a person to cultivate their reason
without the encroachment of religious authorities. In considering each
of these tenets, it will be informative to compare them with Spinoza's
own views on what a person who exercises their reason will believe in
relation to each point.

## Tenet 1: God's Existence 

The first tenet of universal faith, according to Spinoza, is that "There
is a God (that is, a supreme being) who is supremely just and merciful,
or an exemplar of the true life." He argues that belief in God's
existence is necessary if we are to obey him. However, Spinoza qualifies
this statement by saying, "what God, or the exemplar of the true life,
is, ... is irrelevant to faith." Thus it does not matter for faith what
people believe about God's qualities, provided that those qualities
induce people to obedience, which consists of charity and justice
(Spinoza 2007: 14.10--11).

Spinoza argues, however, that it does matter for reason what a person
believes about God. In particular, he maintains an ontotheological
conception of God. In his *Ethics*, he defines God as "absolutely
infinite being, i.e. substance consisting of infinite attributes, each
of which expresses eternal and infinite essence" (Spinoza 2018: 1D6).
This definition has several elements worth noting.

First, Spinoza understands God as the ontological *substance*
constituting all reality. This is not to suggest that all everything
*is* God, or that God is coterminous with the totality of things
perceptible to us, but rather that all reality is *in* God, or that
nothing could exist without God as the ground of being. He defines
*substance* as "that which is in itself and is conceived through itself,
i.e. no concept of any other thing is needed for forming a concept of
it" (Spinoza 2018: 1D3). This definition draws on Aristotle's
*Categories*, which states, "What is called substance ... is what is
neither said of any subject nor in any subject---e.g., an individual man
or horse" (Aristotle 2012: ยง5). That is, if it is possible to express
something about a subject that is not necessarily true of it, then what
is expressed or *predicated* of that subject does not constitute its
substance, since it is possible to conceive the subject without the
predicate. By contrast, one cannot meaningfully say, for instance, that
a particular person is not a person, without forming a contradiction.
The *substance* of a person is thus what makes them who they are,
regardless of the individual properties that might be predicated of them
at one time or another. The substance of a thing remains the same
despite the changes a thing undergoes.

Because a substance depends on nothing else for our conception of it, it
may be said to exist independently of other things insofar as we can
conceive it. Moreover, as Aristotle argues, anything that can be
predicated of a subject, in order to be real, is necessarily also
predicated of substance, although it is merely *accidental* to substance
rather than *essential* to it. This is equivalent to saying that the
property or relationship expressed in the predicate inheres within the
substance, since it cannot be conceived except in relation to the
subject, or instance of a substance, of which it is predicated
(Aristotle 2012: ยง5).

Spinoza radicalizes the Aristotelian conception of substance by
suggesting that inasmuch as any property or relationship can be
predicated of multiple kinds of thing---for example, inasmuch as it can
be predicated of multiple things that *we can conceive them*---it must
be the case that all conceivable things are *modes* or instances of the
same substance. This one substance, which Spinoza calls God, is that
which underlies all reality. With his definition of substance, Spinoza
maintains that there is some aspect of reality that we must recognize as
existing *a priori*, prior to our experiences of individual things. We
are not assured of reality's existence because any particular mode
(apart from our mind) exists, but because we can only conceive the world
insofar as it fits into a coherent whole. Moreover, since a substance
exists independently of anything else, it is impossible for us to
conceive of anything outside reality as its cause. God, as ontological
substance, must be *causa sui*, a cause in itself.

Second, Spinoza understands God as having an infinity of *attributes*.
He defines an attribute as what "an intellect perceives of substance as
constituting its essence" (Spinoza 2018: 1D4). In other words, the
attributes of a substance are the means by which it expresses its
essence in ways accessible to the human mind. The only two attributes of
God accessible to the human intellect are *thought* (which the mind
perceives because it recognizes itself as a thinking being) and
*extension* (the spatial realm, which the mind perceives because it is
only conscious insofar as it has a body). We can only recognize God's
existence through his self-expression within these attributes. However,
Spinoza insists that God has an infinite number of attributes besides
thought and extension, since if this were not the case, then it must be
because he is "limited by some other substance of the same nature" which
prevents him from having those attributes (Spinoza 2018: 1P8D). This
would be absurd because a substance is, by definition, that which is
conceived through itself alone, whereas if it was limited by another
substance, it would also have to be conceived through that substance by
which it is limited (see Spinoza 2018: 1P5). In arguing that there are
infinite attributes of God beyond thought and extension, Spinoza
displaces the finite human intellect as the ultimate arbiter of what is
real. He thereby insists on an epistemic modesty that dissuades us from
projecting onto reality our own anthropocentric teleological reasoning.

Finally, Spinoza states that each of God's attributes expresses eternal
and infinite essence. He offers two parallel definitions of *essence*.
First, he defines the essence of a thing as "that which being given, the
thing is necessarily posited, and being taken away, the thing is
necessarily taken away" (Spinoza 2018: 2D2). In other words, the essence
of a thing is the set of indispensable qualities, without which it would
not be what it is. Second, he defines the essence of a thing as
"something without which the thing cannot be or be conceived, and *vice
versa* something which cannot be or be conceived without the thing."
Whereas the first definition of essence focuses on those qualities of a
thing which comprise it as an *existing* thing, the second definition
focuses on those qualities which comprise it as a *conceivable* thing.
These qualities are the same, since we cannot regard the qualities of a
thing as necessarily constituting its existence unless we understand or
conceive them.

To demonstrate the existence of God as substance, Spinoza utilizes three
variants of the ontological argument. First, Spinoza argues that if we
conceive a substance as existing, then it must exist of its own accord,
since by definition a substance can only be conceived through itself.
This means that if we conceive God (the substance of reality) as
existing at all, then it pertains to his essence to exist, which is to
say that he must exist (Spinoza 2018: 1P11D1).

Second, Spinoza argues that if it were the case that God does not
necessarily exist, there must be some intrinsic or extrinsic reason for
his non-existence. If this reason is intrinsic to God, then this would
presume that God exists, which would contradict the premise that he does
not exist. On the other hand, if the reason for God's inexistence is
extrinsic to him (that is, if there is something outside God that
prevents him from existing), then this would mean that there is a
substance other than God that precludes his existence. However, it would
then have to be the case that this other substance has nothing in common
with God---in which case it could not affect God's existence. But if God
is absolutely infinite and perfect, then he must encompass everything
that exists or can be conceived, meaning that there can be no such
limiting substance. Therefore, God must exist, if anything can be said
to exist or to be conceivable (Spinoza 2018: 1P11D2).

Finally, Spinoza argues that to exist is to have power (namely, the
power to exist and to act on other things). Thus, if the only existing
things are finite beings, then finite beings would be more powerful than
absolutely infinite being, in that the latter would not have the power
necessary to exist. But this is absurd, since finite things, by nature
of being finite, must be less powerful than infinite being. Therefore,
either nothing exists, or an absolutely infinite being (God or reality)
exists. Given that we exist, God must exist (Spinoza 2018: 1P11D3).

Spinoza calls the third proof of God's existence an "*a posteriori*"
rather than an "*a priori*" demonstration, because it depends on our
perception of our own existence or power for its validity. However,
although Spinoza is concerned to demonstrate *a priori* that substance
is prior to its modes, all three demonstrations at least implicitly
depend for their validity on our recognition of reality's existence.
Thus all three arguments are effectively posterior to our cognition of
reality, unless it is maintained that there are things we can know
through intuition prior to our sensory experiences. If one supposes, as
Spinoza himself does, that *a priori* knowledge of God is possible
through intuition, his claim concerning the first two demonstrations is
valid. As Wolfson explains,

> Spinoza makes it unmistakably clear that his proof is primarily
> grounded upon the premise that God's existence is an immediate fact of
> our knowledge. In anticipation of the objection of Thomas Aquinas that
> "God cannot be proved *a priori*, because, indeed, He has no cause,"
> he maintains that "God, however, the first cause of all things and
> even the cause of himself, manifests himself through himself." The
> manifestation of God to us through himself as evidenced by the
> clearness and distinctness and adequacy of the idea we have of Him
> directly and without further reasoning proves His existence (Wolfson
> 1934: 169--70; quoting Spinoza, *Short Treatise* I, 1 ยง10).

Although it is not the case that everyone has an immediate perception of
God's existence, Spinoza maintained that it is possible for people to
gain this immediate perception. Wolfson continues,

> The particular theory of knowledge involved in this sort of reasoning
> is that indirect knowledge may in the course of time become direct
> knowledge which is immediately accepted without the need for
> demonstration. Spinoza himself intimates this particular view when he
> says that the desire to know things by the third kind of knowledge
> [i.e. intuition] may arise from the second kind of knowledge [i.e.
> reason]. ... And so, when the knowledge of God's existence becomes
> immediate and direct, whatever its origin, the existence of God is
> said to be proved ontologically instead of demonstratively, for to
> prove the existence of God ontologically means to perceive it directly
> as a given fact. The immediacy of the knowledge of God's existence is
> fully explained by Spinoza toward the end of the Second Dialogue in
> the *Short Treatise*, and there, too, he seems to intimate that it is
> not all men that do have at first such an immediate knowledge of God.
> "However, I tell you this, that so long as we have not such a clear
> idea of God ... we cannot truly say that we are united with God"
> (Wolfson 1934: 172--73).

(For a critical evaluation of Wolfson's analysis, see Jarrett [1976],
where the author argues that Spinoza's ontological argument is valid
within P5 modal logic. Jarrett argues that "Wolfson ... appear[s] to
confuse the conditions under which a demonstration yields a conclusion,
and the conditions under which one can be said to know that it does," by
incorrectly maintaining that Spinoza's proof requires a person to have a
clear and distinct idea of God. He states, "a demonstration may be
valid, and its premises true, without anyone's being aware of this." In
Wolfson's defense, though, one could say that implicit within the
concept of a proof is not only that it should be formally valid, but
that it should be persuasive, which the ontological proof can only be if
a person has a clear and distinct idea of God as infinite substance.)

## Tenet 2: God's Oneness 

Spinoza's second tenet of universal faith is that "[God] is one." He
argues that we must affirm this because "Devotion, admiration and love,
will arise only from the pre-eminence of one above all others." But he
qualifies this point by stating that "the manner in which [God] is the
exemplar of the true life" does not matter for faith. Thus, although we
must individually affirm that there is a single exemplar of true life,
it does not matter whether God is this exemplar "because He has a just
and merciful mind" or because "all things exist and act through Him and
therefore we understand them through Him and see what is true, right and
good through Him" (Spinoza 2007: 14.10--11).

Spinoza endorses the latter view in the *Ethics*, arguing that there is
only one substance underlying reality: "No substance can be or be
conceived besides God" (Spinoza 2018: 1P14). From this proposition, he
derives two corollaries: first, that "God is unique, i.e. ... that in
the universe there is only one substance and it is absolutely infinite;"
and second, that everything that exists (in the attribute of extension)
or can be conceived (in the attribute of thought) "are either attributes
of God or ... affections of attributes of God" (Spinoza 2018:
1P14C1--2). In other words, everything is either an expression of God's
essence or a *mode*, defined as "the affections of a substance *or* that
which is in another thing through which it is also conceived" (Spinoza
2018: 1D5). Spinoza concludes from this that "Whatever is, is in God,
and nothing can be, or be conceived, without God" (Spinoza 2018: 1P15).
God is the exemplar of true life because everything derives its truth
from his existence.

To say that all things are *in* God, as Spinoza does, is not the same as
identifying all things *as* God. Spinoza sought to preserve the
distinction between God and finite things by distinguishing between
substance and modes. God, as substance, transcends all finite things.
However, God is the immanent cause of all things, since he constitutes
the essence of all things as we perceive them. Spinoza therefore sees no
conflict between God's transcendence and immanence. Rather, he regards
immanence as the opposite of *transitivity*, or the idea that God
creates modes consisting of a substance other than himself. He denies
that God causes things to exist transitively because, in his view, no
substance apart from God can exist (Spinoza 2018: 1P18; see also
Carlisle 2021: 61--62).

Spinoza criticizes "those who surmise that God consists, like a human
being, of body and mind and as subject to passions." In other words, he
rejects anthropomorphic conceptions of God, which posit God as a
particular being, rather than as being itself. Additionally, he
criticizes those who "completely exclude corporeal *or* extended
substance from the divine nature" and maintain that God caused corporeal
nature to exist transitively rather than immanently. These people, he
suggests, do not account for how one substance (God) can cause another
substance (extension) to exist if they have nothing in common. Spinoza
denies that it is unworthy of the divine nature to include extension, or
corporeal nature, as one of its attributes. Rather, he insists that it
is necessary to affirm that extension is an attribute of God if we are
to preserve the unity of substance, by which we can know what is true
and right (Spinoza 2018: 1P15S).

## Tenet 3: God's Omnipresence and Omnipotence 

Spinoza's third tenet of universal faith is that "[God] is everywhere
present and all things are manifest to him." He states that believing in
God's omnipresence and omnipotence is necessary for recognizing that we
have a responsibility to obey him. Again, Spinoza qualifies this dogma
by stating that "it has nothing to do with faith whether one believes
that God is everywhere in essence or in potential." In other words, it
does not matter for faith whether God exercises his infinite power by
the necessity of his essential nature, or whether God has the ability to
exercise his infinite power however he freely chooses (Spinoza 2007:
14.10--11).

In the *Ethics*, Spinoza affirms the former position, maintaining that
God is omnipresent and omnipotent because he is the substance
constituting all things. He states, "From the necessity of the divine
nature infinite things must follow in infinite ways (i.e. all things
that can fall under an infinite intellect)" (Spinoza 2018: 1P16). From
this proposition, he derives three corollaries. First, God is the
efficient cause of all things that fall under an infinite intellect
(Spinoza 2018: 1P16C1). In other words, God is the cause not only of
those things that actually exist, but of all things that can possibly be
conceived, since we can only conceive that which follows necessarily
from previous ideas in our train of thought. Second, God has caused
nothing by accident (Spinoza 2018: 1P16C2). This is not merely to say
that God was intentional in causing everything to exist, but that there
is no property of a thing that does not necessarily follow from God's
infinite nature. Finally, God is the absolute first cause of all things
(Spinoza 2018: 1P16C3).

Spinoza argues that because God necessarily exists and because
everything is in God, "nothing in nature is contingent but everything is
determined to exist and to operate in a specific way by the necessity of
the divine nature" (Spinoza 2018: 1P29). In other words, because God has
caused nothing to exist by accident, there is no property of a thing
that can cause it to act in a way not determined by God himself.

This idea forms the basis of Spinoza's understanding of the Scholastic
distinction between *natura naturans* and *natura naturata*---that is,
between nature as a dynamic process and nature as a static product.
Spinoza states that *natura naturans* refers to "that which is in itself
and is conceived through itself, *or* such attributes of substance as
express eternal and infinite essence, i.e. ... God, insofar as he is
considered as a free cause." By contrast, *natura naturata* refers to
"everything that follows from the necessity of God's nature *or* of any
of God's attributes, i.e. all the modes of God's attributes insofar as
they are considered as things that are in God and can neither be nor be
conceived without God" (Spinoza 2018: 1P29S).

Both *natura naturans* and *natura naturata* are perspectives from which
we may conceive nature. In the former, we conceive nature as a dynamic
process, acting freely, as it were, in its own self-creation. This is
the perspective from which it is admissible to identify nature as a
self-expression of God. In the latter perspective, we conceive nature as
the totality of modes accessible to our cognition. Through the kind of
cognition known as reason, we can only conceive nature through the modes
of extension and thought. However, through the kind of cognition known
as intuition, one can aspire to perceive the inner substance of reality,
namely God (cf. Carlisle 2021: 64--67).

## Tenet 4: God's Dominion and Right 

The fourth tenet of universal faith is that "[God] possesses supreme
right and dominion over all things; nor is anything that he does
compelled by laws, but he does all things at his absolute pleasure and
by his unique grace." As with the third tenet, Spinoza argues that
acknowledging this is necessary to affirm that we have a responsibility
to obey God. If another law can be conceived that is more authoritative
than what God decrees, then our moral responsibility would be to that
higher law rather than to God's decree. Spinoza states that it does not
matter for faith "whether [God] governs all things from liberty or
from the necessity of nature" or "whether he issues edicts like a prince
or teaches them as eternal truths" (Spinoza 2007: 14.10--11).

In the *Ethics*, Spinoza explicitly rejects the idea that God should be
conceived as a sovereign ruler, capable of acting arbitrarily (Spinoza
2018: 2P3S). Rather, he states, "God acts by the laws of his own nature
uncompelled by anyone" (Spinoza 2018: 1P17). Two corollaries follow from
this proposition. First, Spinoza states "that there is no cause besides
the perfection of his own nature which prompts God, extrinsically or
intrinsically, to act." Thus God governs all things from the necessity
of his perfect nature and not from free will. Second, Spinoza states
"that God alone is a free cause," not in that he acts from free will,
but in that God, as infinite substance, is independent of all other
things (Spinoza 2018: 1P17C1--2).

He clarifies this latter point by arguing, first, that it is absurd to
imagine that God can ensure that things are within his power to
accomplish do not happen, and second, that it is absurd to suggest that
God could bring about that which is impossible or irrational. In the
first case, to imagine that God can prevent things within his power from
happening is to imagine that God's power is not fully actualized---that
God is not omnipotent. Spinoza criticizes those who think that God
cannot bring about everything conceivable by an infinite intellect
without exhausting his creative potential and thereby contradicting his
omnipotence. He argues that by suggesting that God can exhaust himself,
his opponents in fact indicate that they do not believe in God's
omnipotence. God's omnipotence, in his view, can only be affirmed if one
does not place any limitations on his power. In the second case, if God
had brought about that which we now consider impossible or
irrational---for example, if God had made it such that the three angles
of a triangle are not equal to two right angles or that effects do not
necessarily follow from their causes---then the order of nature would be
so different than that which we now inhabit that it is pointless to
speak of it. To insist on God's ability to bring about that which is not
the case for the purpose of defending his free will is unwarranted
(Spinoza 2018: 1P17S).

For Spinoza, even when we ascribe intellect to God, we must mean this
only figuratively. The human intellect, he notes, is posterior to or
simultaneous with its perceptions of reality, whereas God's intellect
must be prior to reality since he is its ultimate cause. Moreover, since
the causes of things are distinct from the things themselves in both
their essence (i.e. their nature or potentiality) and their existence
(i.e. their actuality), and since God's intellect is the sole cause of
the essence and existence of things, both the essence and the existence
of the human intellect must be distinct from God's intellect. Therefore,
we cannot ascribe to God an anthropomorphic intellect (Spinoza 2018:
1P17S).

Spinoza denies that God has free will, stating, "Things could not have
been produced by God in any other way or in any other order than they
have been produced" (Spinoza 2018: 1P33). He argues, "if things had been
produced in a different way" than they actually were, "we would have to
attribute another nature to God, different from that which we have been
compelled to attribute to him from consideration of most perfect
being"---that is, from consideration of God as a being who is perfect
because his potentialities have been fully actualized. To suggest that
God could have produced that which he has not actually produced is to
suggest that he is imperfect, since the only way to recognize his
perfection is through that which is actual. Additionally, Spinoza argues
that the idea of God's absolute free will is "worthless" and "a great
obstacle to knowledge [*scientia*]." There is no practical value in
believing that God has absolute free will. In fact, to suppose that God
could cause things to happen in ways that violate the principle of
causality (such as by a supernatural intervention) is to preclude the
viability of scientific endeavor, which seeks to understand effects by
identifying their causes. It is only because we can consistently rely on
the principle that causes necessarily produce their effects that we can
recognize God as the first cause of all things. Spinoza summarizes his
argument by explaining, "Everything depends upon the abilities of God.
In order for things to be different than they are, the will of God would
necessarily have to be different. But the will of God cannot be
different. ... Neither therefore can things be different" (Spinoza 2018:
1P33S).

There is therefore nothing arbitrary about the means by which God
decrees things to exist and to act. God cannot be said to make decrees
arbitrarily as a prince. Rather, God necessarily decrees what is
eternally true---that is, what can be conceived by an infinite
intellect. Since an understanding of the existence and actions of things
is useful for helping us to know what is good or beneficial to
ourselves, God can be said to teach us his will insofar as we recognize
that what he wills (or causes) is identical with what his intellect
conceives as eternally true.

## Tenet 5: Obedience to God 

Spinoza's fifth tenet of universal faith states, "Worship of God and
obedience to Him consist solely in justice and charity, or in love of
one's neighbor" (Spinoza 2018: 14.10). Since the purpose of Spinoza's
argument concerning universal faith is to unite those who hold differing
views on religious doctrines under a joint commitment to charity and
justice, which are necessary for them to live together peaceably, this
is arguably the most important of his tenets.

Spinoza insists that "It is ... not the man who advances the best
reasons who necessarily manifests the best faith but rather the man who
performs the best works of justice and charity" (Spinoza 2007: 14.11).
Whereas faith and theology are concerned with securing people's charity
and justice, reason and philosophy are concerned with pursuing the
truth. Because the aims of these disciplines are mutually exclusive,
there is no possibility of conflict between them, provided that a person
properly understands their roles. Spinoza states, "Faith therefore
allows every person the greatest liberty to think" or to philosophize
without being restricted by religious authorities. "It only condemns as
heretics and schismatics those who put forward beliefs for the purpose
of promoting disobedience, hatred, conflict, and anger" (Spinoza 2007:
14.13). Thus, if a person's beliefs are intended to promote hatred of
others and disobedience to sovereign authorities under the garb of
religion, then it is not true faith that they are promoting, and
consequently sovereign authorities have no obligation to protect their
religious beliefs---to the contrary, it is the right of the sovereign
authority to suppress them.

Spinoza makes a similar argument concerning the political necessity of
charity and justice in the *Ethics*, where he also includes a third
necessary trait, honor. He states, "The things that generate concord are
related to justice, equity and honor. For as well as being offended by
injustice and inequity, people are also offended by anything that is
held to be base *or* by someone's rejecting the accepted morals of the
commonwealth. The things especially necessary for fostering love are
things that pertain to religion and piety" (Spinoza 2018: 4App15).
Spinoza defines *religion* as "whatever we desire and whatever action we
do of which we are the cause insofar as we have an idea of God *or*
insofar as we know God." Relatedly, he defines *piety* as "the desire to
do good which is generated by our living by the command of reason"
(Spinoza 2018: 4P37S1).

In other words, Spinoza argues that for people to form a peaceable
society, they must be united in love towards their fellow citizens.
Although in the *Theological-Political Treatise* he insists that
theology should be distinguished from philosophy in that it is primarily
concerned with inducing obedience, in the *Ethics* he maintains that
love towards one's fellow citizens can best be attained through reason,
by which one can gain an adequate knowledge of God. Those who live by
reason desire to treat others charitably, justly, and honorably, which
is the essence of true piety. Spinoza calls the attitude of the person
who lives by reason "fortitude," which consists of *spiritedness* and
*generosity* (Spinoza 2018: 4P73S). He defines the former as "the desire
by which everyone endeavors to preserve his own being by the dictate of
reason alone" and the latter as "the desire by which each one endeavors
to help other beings by the dictate of reason alone and to unite them in
friendship with himself" (Spinoza 2018: 3P59S). "A person of fortitude,"
Spinoza argues, hates no one, but strives to overcome hatred with love,
by desiring "that the good he wants for himself should also come to
others" (Spinoza 2018: 4P73S).

## Tenet 6: Salvation 

Spinoza's sixth tenet of universal faith maintains that only those who
obey God will be saved, while "those who live under the sway of
pleasures will be lost." He argues, "If people did not firmly believe
this, there would be no reason why they should obey God rather than
their own pleasures." But he also qualifies this statement by suggesting
that it does not matter for faith "whether man obeys God of his own free
will or by the necessity of the divine decree, or whether reward of the
good and punishment of wrongdoers takes places naturally or
supernaturally" (Spinoza 2007: 14.10--11).

Spinoza's rationalistic view of salvation is the central theme of his
*Ethics*. His conception of salvation begins with his metaphysics, in
which everything that exists follows from the necessity of God's
infinite nature. He argues that the essence of every mode of God's
attributes consists of the "endeavor [*conatus*] by which each thing
endeavors to persevere in its own being" (Spinoza 2018: 3P7). This is
also the case with the human mind, which is a mode of God in the
attribute of thought. Spinoza explains,

> When this endeavor is related to the mind alone, it is called will.
> But when it is related to mind and body simultaneously, it is called
> appetite, which accordingly is nothing but a human being's very
> essence, and things that serve his preservation necessarily follow
> from its nature, and therefore a person is determined to do those
> things. Then, there is no difference between appetite and desire
> except that desire is very often attributed to people insofar as they
> are conscious of their appetite, and therefore it can be defined as
> follows: *desire is appetite together with consciousness of it*. From
> all this therefore it is clear that we do not endeavor anything, we do
> not will anything, we do not seek or desire anything, because we judge
> it to be good; on the contrary, we judge a thing to be good because we
> endeavor it, will it, seek it and desire it (Spinoza 2018: 3P9S).

This argument that people are determined to do what they believe is
conducive to their self-preservation reflects Spinoza's denial of free
will. He says, "There is no absolute *or* free will in the mind; but the
mind is determined to will this or that by a cause" (Spinoza 2018:
2P48), namely whatever volition (i.e. affirmation or denial) that is
inherent within the ideas that the mind has. If the mind has an
idea---for instance, that it would be beneficial to ourselves to seek a
particular pleasure---then we will necessarily will the affirmation
inherent in this idea unless we are otherwise precluded from doing so by
another idea---for instance, that the particular pleasure we desire is
unhealthy for us (Spinoza 2018: 2P49). For Spinoza, "The will and the
intellect are one and the same thing," since whatever idea the intellect
conceives necessarily involves some affirmation or denial by the will
(Spinoza 2018: 2P49C).

Spinoza argues that there are four ethical advantages to denying that we
have free will. First, "it is useful insofar as it teaches us that we
act solely at the behest of God and that we share in the divine nature,
and that we do so more and more, the more perfect our actions are and
the more we understand God." It shows us that blessedness "consists
solely in the cognition of God, which leads us to do only those things
that love and piety urge us to do," rather than to do what is right in
pursuit of extrinsic rewards, like the promise of heaven (Spinoza 2018:
2P49S). This statement indicates Spinoza's own position on whether our
reward for doing good is natural or supernatural. His denial of free
will goes hand-in-hand with his rejection of the idea that we ought to
behave piously in pursuit of an extrinsic, supernatural reward. The
*Ethics* culminates in the proposition, "Blessedness is not the reward
of virtue, but virtue itself; and we do not enjoy it because we restrain
our lusts; on the contrary we are able to restrain lusts precisely
because we enjoy it." Blessedness is intrinsic and natural for the
person who has an intellectual love of God, since it is because of this
love that they are able to be freed from their harmful desires (Spinoza
2018: 5P42). By contrast, a person who seeks blessedness as a
supernatural or extrinsic reward only does so on the basis of a
misconception concerning freedom and happiness. As he explains,

> For most people seem to believe that they are free insofar as they are
> allowed to obey their lust, and that they are giving up their right
> insofar as they are obliged to live by the precepts of divine law.
> Therefore they believe that piety and religion and absolutely
> everything related to fortitude of spirit are burdens that they hope
> to throw off after death and to receive a reward for their servitude,
> i.e. for their piety and religion. And it is not by this hope alone
> that they are induced to live by the precepts of the divine law
> insofar as their weakness and their powerless spirit allow, but also,
> and especially, by fear---the fear of being punished with cruel
> tortures after death. If people did not have this hope and this fear
> ... they would return to character and let lust run it all, and obey
> fortune rather than themselves (Spinoza 2018: 5P41S).

Second, Spinoza argues that his denial of free will "is useful insofar
as it teaches us how we ought to conduct ourselves in the face of
fortune *or* things that are not within our abilities." Specifically, it
teaches us that we should "bear both faces of fortune with equanimity"
(Spinoza 2018: 2P49S). That is, by helping us to distinguish between
those actions that follow from the essence of the mind (i.e. from our
endeavor to persevere in our being) and the passions caused by the
affects of external objects on us, Spinoza's teaching enables us to find
peace with those things that are not in our control while making the
best of what is in our control.

Third, Spinoza's doctrine teaches us not to hate, ridicule, or envy
others, or to help others out of pity, partiality, or superstition.
Rather, it teaches us to cultivate spiritedness and generosity under the
guidance of reason (Spinoza 2018: 2P49S).

Finally, Spinoza's doctrine "teaches us how citizens should be governed
and led, not to be slaves, but to do freely the actions that are best"
(Spinoza 2018: 2P49S). This indicates the political as well as the
psychological implications of Spinoza's determinism. To recognize
ourselves as subject to the law of causal necessity does not reduce us
to slaves. Although Spinoza's doctrine acknowledges the extent to which
our behaviors are determined by passions, it also enables us to
recognize our power to act on the basis of our own essential desire for
self-preservation towards the formation of a just and equitable society,
in which everyone can experience positive freedom. Importantly, this
requires a society's citizens to collectively repudiate the anger,
hatred, envy, pity, partiality, and superstition that keep them in
bondage to their passions.

## Tenet 7: God's Grace and Mercy 

While Spinoza argues that those who live by faith must affirm that one's
salvation depends on their obedience---that is, their charity and
justice---he nonetheless adds, as the final tenet of universal faith,
that "God forgives the repentant their sins." He explains that "there is
no one who does not sin, and therefore if this were not clearly
established, all would despair of their salvation and would have no
reason to believe that God was merciful," as the first tenet maintains.
Spinoza warns against abusing this teaching: "It makes no difference ...
with regard to faith how anyone understands these questions [concerning
specific doctrines] and others like them, provided no one draws
conclusions with an eye to having greater license for wrongdoing or
becoming less obedient towards God" (Spinoza 2007: 14.10--11).

In the *Ethics*, Spinoza denies that God experiences passions like joy
and sadness, since passions occur when one is affected by external
objects, whereas there is nothing external to God that could act on him
(see Spinoza 2018: 5P17). For this reason, it would be inaccurate to
suggest that God is gracious or merciful because he is affected by the
emotion of love or pity towards us. "Properly speaking, God does not
love anyone or hate anyone" (Spinoza 2018: 5P17C).

Nevertheless, Spinoza maintains that there is a qualified sense in which
it is reasonable to say that God loves us. He states, "The intellectual
love of the mind for God is the very love of God with which God loves
himself ... insofar as he can be explained through the essence of the
human mind considered from the vantage of eterntiy, i.e. the
intellectual love of the mind for God is a part of the infinite love
with which God loves himself" (Spinoza 2018: 5P36). That is, since God
constitutes the essence of the human mind, when we have the intellectual
love of God whereby we see all things, including ourselves, as
proceeding from the necessity of his infinite nature, God effectively
loves himself through us. "It follows from this that insofar as God
loves himself, he loves human beings, and consequently that the love of
God for human beings and the mind's intellectual love for God are one
and the same thing" (Spinoza 2018: 5P36C).

This can also be said concerning God's justice and mercy. Inasmuch as
just and merciful actions follow from generosity, God could be regarded
as demonstrating his justice and mercy to others insofar as he
constitutes the essence of our minds when we act generously towards
others. In fact, God's justice and mercy are only actualized in the
world to the extent that we develop fortitude, which is why Spinoza
considers this trait to be the essence of piety. Spinoza states in the
*Theological-Political Treatise*, "we find no traces of divine justice
except where just men rule" (Spinoza 2007: 19.8).

---

### Citation Notes

Rather than citing Spinoza's works by page number, I am citing Spinoza's
*Theological-Political Treatise* by chapter and paragraph (e.g.,
paragraph 10 of chapter 14 is cited as 14.10) and Spinoza's *Ethics* by
chapter and proposition (e.g., proposition 7 of chapter 3 is cited as
3P7). The following abbreviations are used in my citations of Spinoza's
*Ethics*: A = axiom; App = appendix item; C = corollary; D = definition;
P = proposition; and S = scholium.

Scripture quotations are taken from the New Revised Standard Version
(NRSV).

### Bibliography

Aristotle, *Categories*, in Stephen M. Cahn (ed.), *Classics of Western
Philosophy* (8th ed.) (Indianapolis: Hackett, 2012).

Carlisle, Clare, *Spinoza's Religion* (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2021).

Jarrett, Charles E., "Spinoza's Ontological Argument," *Canadian Journal
of Philosophy* 6:4 (December 1976), 685--92.

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Jonathan Israel, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Jonathan Israel), *Theological-Political Treatise* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007).

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Matthew J. Kisner, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Matthew J. Kisner), *Ethics Proved in Geometrical Order* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2018).

Wolfson, Harry Austryn, *The Philosophy of Spinoza* (volume 1) (New
York: Meridian, 1934).
