---
title: Leibniz on God, Reason, Passion, and Theodicy
layout: post
---

*This is Part 2 of a three-part series in which I share my thoughts on
G. W. Leibniz's *Monadology*. In this part, I will discuss Leibniz's
principles of reason; his proofs of God's existence; his conceptions of
action and passion; and his theodicy.*

*An overview of the concepts in Spinoza's metaphysics to which I refer
in this article may be found in my article, "[Spinoza on Faith and
Philosophy]({% post_url 2023-05-03-spinoza-on-faith-versus-philosophy %})."*

## ¶¶31--35: Principles of Reason and Kinds of Truth 

Leibniz distinguishes between two principles of reason. The first is the
*principle of contradiction*, "in virtue of which we judge that which
involves a contradiction to be false, and that which is opposed or
contradictory to the false to be true." The second is the *principle of
sufficient reason*, "by virtue of which we consider that we can find no
true or existent fact, no true assertion, without there being a
sufficient reason why it is thus and not otherwise." He notes that
sufficient reasons are usually not available to us.

Additionally, Leibniz distinguishes between two kinds of truth. A *truth
of reasoning* is a necessary truth, the opposite of which is impossible,
while a *truth of fact* is a contingent truth, the opposite of which is
possible. The reasons for truths of reasoning can be discovered by
*analysis*, which consists of "resolving [an idea] into simpler ideas
and simpler truths until we reach the primitives," such as the monads
that comprise composite substances. The definitions of these primitive
or simple ideas cannot be definitively given, nor can the primitive
principles involved in constructing truths of reasoning be definitively
proven. Leibniz notes that the process of analysis is "how the
speculative *theorems* and practical *canons* of mathematicians are
reduced ... to *definitions*, *axioms*, and *postulates*."

## ¶¶36--38: *A Posteriori* Argument for God's Existence 

Leibniz argues that "there must be a sufficient reason in contingent
truths, or truths of fact." This reason, he notes, involves "an infinity
of past and present shapes and motions that enter into the efficient
cause" of whatever happens or exists. But "since all this *detail*
involves nothing but other prior or more detailed contingents, each of
which needs a similar analysis in order to give its reason," it is
impossible to identify the sufficient reason for contingent truths. This
leads Leibniz to suggest that "the sufficient or ultimate reason of
things is outside the sequence or *series* of this multiplicity of
contingencies, however infinite it may be." Specifically, it must reside
"in a necessary substance in which the diversity of changes is only
eminent, as in its source." This necessary substance is God. In other
words, for Leibniz, unless the sufficient reason or source of contingent
things is a substance that is not contingent and thus transcends
contingent things, it is ultimately impossible for us to identify the
sufficient reason for things---that is, an answer to the question of why
the world exists. His rationalistic faith demands that it should be
possible for us to find a reason for the existence of everything,
including the universe. For this reason, he finds it necessary to posit
the existence of a transcendent God as an ultimate cause. Leibniz calls
this his *a posteriori* argument for God's existence.

Leibniz's conception of God as transcending all contingent
truths---which posits God as the transitive cause of all things,
including simple substances---does not align with Spinoza's conception
of God as the immanent cause of all things. The question that confronts
us is whether critical reason requires us to collapse all substances
into one, as Spinoza does, and to regard all finite things as modes of
the two attributes of substance rather than as their own substances. The
answer hinges on whether it is intellectually satisfying for Leibniz to
claim that monads depend on God as a transitive cause. Is it preferable
to imagine that monads, which can only be caused by a supernatural
creator, exist, or that are all things merely composite substances, for
which we will never be able to sufficiently identify the reasons for
their existence? Moreover, is it not superfluous to insist that monads
are "windowless"---that nothing constitutive can pass into them---while
also asserting that they receive that which constitutes their being from
God? By positing the existence of a God who is the transitive, rather
than the immanent, cause of all things, does Leibniz not preclude the
possibility of a critical intuition, which remains receptive to the
possibility of discovering a sufficient cause even of those facts that
now appear to us as irreducible, by simply substituting God as a
placeholder as the sufficient cause?

It is merely the imagination that supplies the idea of a transitive God
to fill the gaps in our knowledge of the causes of things. It is
possible for us to retain a sense of the unity of reality despite its
multiplicity, without asserting the idea of a transitive creator as its
cause. By insisting on the multiplicity of monads, Leibniz remains
committed to a conception of God that can only be accepted by
heteronomous faith rather than by autonomous reason. His metaphysics is
inconsistent with critical reason, in that reason involves our
imposition of a single principle of order on the world as we perceive
it. This judgment imposed on our perceptions results in our conception
of the world as consisting of a single substance. If we want to say that
there is some aspect of reality that escapes this judgment, then we
cannot say anything affirmative about that aspect of reality; we cannot
even affirm that it is the cause of the world, in the natural sense of
the word "cause" as meaning efficient causation. Supernatural
"causation" is, almost by definition, absurd. Thus to argue that God's
existence can be known from reason, as Leibniz does, is absurd.

## ¶39: God's Oneness and Sufficiency 

Leibniz argues for God's oneness by appealing to the interconnection of
all contingent truths: "Since this substance [i.e. God] is a
sufficient reason for all this diversity, which is utterly
interconnected, there is only one God, and this God is sufficient."
However, it is not evident that the interconnection of the diversity
within the universe demonstrates that there is only a *single* reason
for this diversity. It is conceivable that although the diversity of
things within the universe has always been interconnected, an infinite
number of threads of causation could always have existed in parallel. It
is a mere presupposition that only a single cause must have been
responsible for everything that exists. Moreover, this is a
presupposition that appears to conflict with the *prima facie*
multiplicity of causes behind everything we observe in the physical
world. Is it not possible that, as Immanuel Kant suggests, categories of
quantity, such as unity and plurality, are merely judgments imposed by
our minds on the appearances of things, but that neither unity nor
plurality apply to things-in-themselves?

If one were to accept Spinoza's metaphysics, in which the unity that we
perceive in the universe could be attributed to the singularity of our
reasoning, then this issue of knowing whether God is one would not be a
problem. The existence and oneness of God (i.e. substance) could be
defended by appealing to the existence and oneness of our experience, as
Spinoza effectively does with his variations of the ontological
argument. But in Leibniz's metaphysics, which posits a multiplicity of
monads, it is much less evident why it must be the case that each of
these monads must have the same substance as their ultimate causes.
Leibniz's suggestion that this must be the case in order to explain the
interconnection of things is inadequate, precisely because he regards
monads as incapable of affecting each other. He argues that each monad
is created by God with an internal principle that mirrors those of all
other monads, and especially that of the universe as a whole, but this
suggestion is dubious. It seems introduced precisely in order to defend
the existence of a transitive God. But in positing a God that did not
ordain all things to be perfect (since monads differ from one another in
the extent to which they perfectly mirror the universe as a whole),
Leibniz's metaphysics seems to suggest that God is impotent (since he
could not create all things to be equally perfect). The differences in
perfections among the monads could almost be more plausibly explained by
there being an infinite number of creator gods, corresponding to each of
the monads and differing in their respective competencies.

## ¶¶40--42: God's Perfection and Creation's Imperfection 

Leibniz states that "this supreme substance"---God---"which is unique,
universal, and necessary must be incapable of limits and must contain as
much reality as is possible, insofar as there is nothing outside it
which is independent of it, and insofar as it is a simple consequence of
its possible existence." Thus God must be "absolutely
perfect---*perfection* being nothing but the magnitude of positive
reality considered as such, setting aside the limits or bounds in the
things which have it." Leibniz conceives perfection as the degree of
positive reality within a thing and the *power* of a thing as its
ability to exist or to be real. God, in his view, is omnipotent because
he has the power to actualize everything that he desires to be real.

Here we are again confronted with the challenge that Leibniz's
metaphysics demands our faith in a transitive God rather than our
immediate intuition of an immanent God. Leibniz continues, "It also
follows that creatures derive their perfections from God's influence,
but that they derive their imperfections from their own nature, which is
incapable of being without limits. For it is in this that they are
distinguished from God." However, if it is true that there is nothing
"outside of [God] which is independent of it," then from where do
imperfect things derive their imperfections? In other words, in what
does the imperfection of a thing subsist? How is it possible to conceive
a thing's limitedness without also conceiving that which exists outside
its bounds? And if God is identified as the substance that fills the
bounds of a thing, then how can it be denied that God is not limited by
something outside himself, unless God is also recognized as the
substance constituting that which lies outside the boundaries of a
thing? However, if it is the case that God is the source of that which
limits a thing, then God, rather than the thing itself, must be
recognized as the source of that thing's imperfections.

To accept Leibniz's doctrine of creation *ex nihilo*, in which the
imperfections of a thing are owed to the *nihil* which limits its
existence, requires a leap of faith that defies critical reason, since
it demands of us that we should accept that Nothing is not real, while
also affirming that Nothing has discernible affects on the direct
objects of our experience. We could regard this irrationalism as a form
of nihilism, not only in that it demands our acceptance of the
plausibility of *nihil* as a negative cause, but also in that it
precludes us from imposing any sense of order or meaning on the objects
of our experience. Unless we can regard our judgments of our
perceptions---by which our mind imposes a sense of the definiteness or
limitedness of a thing---as meaningful, we are left in the position of
Wittgenstein, who in the *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus* relegated what
is valuable (such as aesthetic and ethical values) to a "mystical" realm
beyond that which we can positively affirm. Wittgenstein's insistence on
remaining silent in the face of the mystical is only sustainable if we
deny that our judgments are valuable, which, in Spinoza's view, would be
absurd. How can we arrive at a judgment of a thing, even if all we can
perceive of it is its appearances rather than the thing-in-itself,
without the supposition that our judgment is meaningful or valuable?
This would demand of us an artificially absurdist attitude towards our
perceptions of the world.

## ¶¶43--45: *A Priori* Argument for God's Existence 

Leibniz argues, "God is not only the source of existences, but also that
of essences." In other words, God is "the source of that which is real
in possibility," since his "understanding is the realm of eternal truths
or that of the ideas on which they depend." Unless God was involved in
making that which is possible real, there could be no reality to
anything, nor would it even be meaningful to conceive of anything as
possible. Leibniz explains, "if there is reality in essences or
possibles, or indeed, in eternal truths, this reality must be grounded
in something existent and actual, and consequently, it must be grounded
in the existence of the necessary being, in whom essence involves
existence, that is, in whom possible being is sufficient for actual
being." He states that God, who is the necessary being, "alone ... has
this privilege, that he must exist if he is possible." Consequently,
since nothing can preclude the possibility of eternal truths (that is,
they must be true by their very nature), Leibniz concludes that we can
know God's existence *a priori*, not merely *a posteriori* through the
existence of contingent beings.

A significant challenge with Leibniz's *a priori* demonstration of God's
existence is that, arguably, eternal truths themselves only exist as
abstractions from our sensory experiences. If this is the case, then
Leibniz is not offering an *a priori* argument for God's existence, but
rather a more complex variant of his *a posteriori* argument. I have
discussed this problem, as it relates to Spinoza's *a priori* proofs of
God's existence, in [a previous
article]({% post_url 2023-05-03-spinoza-on-faith-versus-philosophy %}).
Although Spinoza's *a priori* demonstrations of God's existence may be
consistent with intuition, they are less explicable in terms of reason.
In Leibniz's case, where a multiplicity of monads is affirmed, the *a
priori* demonstration of God's existence is even less satisfactory,
given that there is no sufficient reason why we ought to suppose that
eternal truths must have a single reason for being real.

## ¶¶46--47: Contingent Truths and the Principle of Fitness 

Leibniz argues that "we should not imagine, as some do, that since the
eternal truths depend on God, they are arbitrary and depend on his
will." Only contingent truths, he notes, depend on God's will. In
choosing among the various possibilities for the actualization of a
thing, God makes his selection according to the principle of "*fitness*
[*convenance*] or the choice of the *best*." Eternal truths, by
contrast, "depend solely on his understanding, and are its internal
object."

These statements appear to conflict with Leibniz's next proposition that
"all created or derivative monads are products, limited by the
receptivity of the creature, to which it is essential to be limited." On
one hand, he maintains that the creation of monads is determined
according to the principle of fitness. On the other hand, he suggests
that although God chooses the best in determining contingent truths, the
creatures which he forms through his "fulgurations" are, by nature,
limited in their receptivity of these fulgurations. How can it be said
that God chooses according to a principle of fitness if finite things
are, by the very nature he created them to have, unfit to receive his
divine influence? Moreover, how can the receptivity of a thing to God's
fulgurations enter into its constitution if the thing does not exist
prior to those fulgurations? Again, either God did not create all things
with utter perfection, in which case one is entitled to ask whether God
himself is truly perfect, or there must be a substance besides God, such
as *nihil*, which has always existed alongside God, and which must be
responsible for a thing's lack of receptivity to God. Neither of these
possibilities is theologically satisfying, if we wish to believe that
God is both unique (i.e. that there is nothing besides God on which
monads depend) and omnipotent.

## ¶48: God's Power, Knowledge, and Will 

Leibniz insists, "God has [1] *power*, which is the source of
everything, [2] *knowledge*, which contains the diversity of ideas,
and finally [3] *will*, which brings about changes or products in
accordance with the principle of the best." In his view, these traits
"correspond to what, in created monads, is [1] the subject or the
basis, [2] the perceptive faculty and [3] the appetitive faculty."
In other words, God's power is analogous to the substantiality of a
monad; his knowledge is analogous to the ability of a monad to perceive
changes within itself; and his will is analogous to the inner aim
towards which a monad's appetition is directed. The only difference
between God and created monads is that the former is "absolutely
infinite or perfect, while in the created monads or in entelechies ...
they are only imitations of it, in proportion to the perfection that
they have."

Spinoza differs from Leibniz in that he denies that God's power,
intellect (knowledge), and will are distinct. He argues that to suggest
that God's infinite intellect can conceive of things which he does not,
in actuality, cause to exist is to deny his omnipotence, since God's
power can only be considered actual if he actualizes his creativity.
Moreover, every idea that is contained within an intellect necessarily
involves some affirmation, which the mind cannot negate unless it has
some other idea by which the affirmation may be denied. Thus, if God is
perfect and omniscient (possessing all possible ideas in his intellect),
he cannot refrain from willing into existence what his intellect
conceives as possible. Therefore, God's power, intellect, and will are
the same.

Spinoza denies that there is any principle extrinsic to God, such as a
principle of fitness, by which he determines what he ought to will into
existence. Reality is not perfect because God has only willed what is
perfect, but because perfection is whatever follows from the
completeness or perfection of God's own infinite nature---namely,
everything that exists or can be conceived. Only if we want to believe
that imperfect things exist---which, in Spinoza's view, would be based
entirely on our own subjective preferences---is there a reason to
suppose that God's will is distinct from his intellect. And only if we
want to believe that God is omnipotent in spite of the existence of
imperfect things is there a reason to suppose that the imperfection of a
thing is owed to something other than God (e.g. *nihil*, or the free
will by which a thing is unreceptive to God's fulgurations). There is
little reason for nihilism (by which I here mean the belief that a
meaningless *nihil* or nothingness enters into the constitution of a
thing) or a belief in free will (i.e. the idea that a thing is
constituted by a lack of receptivity to positive substance, which it may
be said to freely "will") apart from the presupposition that the
universe is inherently imperfect, rather than this being a merely
subjective valuation derived from our own interests and preferences.

## ¶¶49--52: Action and Passion 

Leibniz states that a "creature is said to *act* insofar as it is
perfect, and *to be acted upon* [*patir*] by another, insofar as it is
imperfect. Thus we attribute *action* to a monad insofar as it has
distinct perceptions, and *passion*, insofar as it has confused
perceptions." He notes that "one creature is more perfect than another
as one finds in it that which provides an *a priori* reason for what
happens in another." However, he adds that in the case of monads, which
depend for their existence on nothing other than God, the influence of
one on the other can only be explained in terms of a supernatural
intervention, by which God takes into account what effects should happen
in a monad in consideration of the actions that occur within another.
Thus, God has preordained the inner principle by which all monads act so
that they appear to act in harmony with each other, as subject to the
law of causality, even though causation among monads is merely illusory.
"God, comparing two simple substances, finds in each reasons that
require him to adjust the other to it; and consequently, what is active
in some respects is passive from another point of view: *active* insofar
as what is known distinctly in one serves to explain what happens in
another; and *passive* insofar as the reason for what happens in one is
found in what is known distinctly in another."

Spinoza similarly defines an *action* as "when something takes place
within us or outside of us of which we are the adequate cause"---that
is, when the effects of our actions may be clearly perceived through
them---and *passion* as "when something takes place within us or
something follows from our nature of which we are only a partial cause"
(Spinoza 2018: 3D2--3). However, he departs from Leibniz in denying that
there are degrees of perfection. Insofar as a thing is real at all, it
is necessarily perfect, since it is nothing other than a mode of an
attribute of substance or God, which is perfect. Differences in the
inherent perfection of a thing are only conceivable if things are
distinguished substantially rather than modally. For Spinoza, the
ultimate *a priori* reason for which one thing acts on another is that
God has caused it to exist and to act in its determinate way. Although
this initially appears to resemble Leibniz's idea that God has
determined things to act according to an internal principle by which
they act in harmony with each other, in fact, it differs from Leibniz's
metaphysics in its affirmation that all apparent disharmony, resulting
from what Leibniz regards as imperfection, is also caused by God. There
is nothing illusory in the capacity for one thing to affect another,
even if a thing is conceived in its most atomic or irreducible form.
Causal efficacy is a property not merely of finite things, but of God
himself.

Leibniz himself implicitly acknowledges this when he indicates that God
is "required" to adjust one monad so that it harmonizes with another. If
God were to choose otherwise despite this requirement, then causality
would be inconceivable. But if God cannot choose otherwise, then it
makes little sense to speak of a divine intervention or supernatural
causation, distinct from efficient or natural causation, as Leibniz
does.

## ¶¶53--55: Theodicy 

Leibniz argues that "since there is an infinity of possible universes in
God's ideas, and since only one of them can exist, there must be a
sufficient reason for God's choice, a reason which determines him
towards one thing rather than another." This reason, he states, "can
only be found in *fitness*, or in the degree of perfection that the
worlds contain, each possible world having the right to claim existence
in proportion to the perfection it contains." Leibniz argues that we can
be assured that we live in the best of all possible worlds because God
is omniscient, benevolent, and omnipotent.

But supposing that God had created the universe differently than he did,
would that universe's Leibniz not, in order to establish God's
benevolence, claim that the universe with which he was familiar was the
most perfect possible? In fact, it is easy for us to conceive of many
possible universes more perfect or preferable to ourselves than this
one. By whose definition of perfection was this world chosen from among
all other possibilities? If it is God's definition, as Leibniz suggests,
then we are expected to believe that God's conception of perfection
happens to align with our own interests, although there is no reason why
this should be the case, apart from our *preference* that our happiness
(what we prefer) should be aligned with what is good (what God has
ordained).

## ¶¶56--60: Monads as Imperfect Mirrors of the Universe 

Leibniz states that the divinely ordained "interconnection or
accommodation of all created things to each other, and each to all the
others, brings it about that each simple substance has relations that
express all the others, and consequently, that each simple substance is
a perpetual, living mirror of the universe." Because these monads are
all mirrors of the universe, they are distinguishable from each other
according to the various perspectives on the universe they embody.
Leibniz explains, "because of the infinite multitude of simple
substances, there are, as it were, just as many different universes,
which are, nevertheless, only perspectives of a single one,
corresponding to the different points of view of each monad." The
variety of perspectives of the universe as a whole is what constitutes
the variety in the universe, and the fact that these different
perspectives involve a preordained harmony is what guarantees unity and
order amid this diversity.

This harmonious variety is, for Leibniz, what constitutes the perfection
of God's creation. God has actualized the best of all possible universes
in that there is no greater harmony that could be established among the
various perspectives or monads without thereby diminishing their
diversity or comprehensiveness. And it is this perfect choice by God
that vindicates his greatness and right to dominion.

Nonetheless, Leibniz admits that the ability for each monad to mirror or
represent the whole is "confused as to the detail of the whole universe,
and can only be distinct for a small portion of things, that is, either
for those that are closest, or for those that are greatest with respect
to each monad." That is, monads are not merely distinguished by their
different perspectives of the universe, but by the extent to which they
adequately reflect it. Unless it were the case that not all monads
adequately reflect the universe, "each monad would be a divinity."
Leibniz continues, "Monads are limited, not as to their objects, but
with respect to the modifications of their knowledge of them." That is,
monads are "limited and differentiated by the degrees of their distinct
perceptions," or the accuracy with which they can describe different
aspects of the universe. Given that some monads are less accurate than
others, we must admit that not all things within the universe are
perfect, although God's creation as a whole is perfect. To expect
absolute perfection of all things in the universe would be to demand the
eradication of all differences.

Although one might agree that a world in which all differences are
eliminated by perfectionism is undesirable, it is impossible to ignore
the normativity inherent in Leibniz's concept of perfection. His idea
that a monad has an inner appetition by which it endeavors to attain
perfection, or an accurate representation of the universe, not only
accounts for the differences among monads by establishing qualitative
distinctions between them and the universe as a whole, but indicates
that it is desirable that monads should eventually attain a total unity
with the universe, such that these differences would be eradicated. An
important distinction between Leibniz's concept of appetition and
Spinoza's concept of the *conatus*, or essential endeavor, of a thing to
persevere in its being is that whereas the former regards a monad's
endeavor as consisting of an aspiration to reflect the universe as a
whole, the latter regards a mode's endeavor as its striving to be what
it already is. Thus Leibniz's concept of appetition sets the aim of a
monad as something extrinsic to it which, if attained, would result in
the eradication of that monad as something unique, while Spinoza's
concept of the *conatus* sets the aim of a mode as something intrinsic
to it which, if attained, would preserve it as distinct.

---

### Citation Notes

Every citation of Leibniz's *Monadology* in this article is taken from
the paragraph(s) mentioned in the corresponding section header.

Rather than citing Spinoza's works by page number, I am citing them by
chapter and proposition (e.g., proposition 7 of chapter 3 is cited as
3P7). The following abbreviations are used in my citations of
Spinoza's *Ethics*: A = axiom; App = appendix item; C = corollary; D =
definition; L = lemma; P = proposition; and S = scholium.

### Bibliography

Leibniz, G. W., *Monadology* (trans. Roger Ariew and Daniel Garber), in
Carl Levenson and Jonathan Westphal (eds.), *Reality* (Indianapolis:
Hackett, 1994).

Spinoza, Benedict de (ed. Matthew J. Kisner, trans. Michael Silverthorne
and Matthew J. Kisner), *Ethics Proved in Geometrical Order* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2018).
