---
title: What&rsquo;s Missing from the Adventist Trinity Doctrines?
layout: post
---

*The original version of this article was published on* Adventist Today *as "[How Our Adventist Pioneers Got the Trinity So Wrong](https://atoday.org/how-our-adventist-pioneers-got-the-trinity-wrong/)."*

## Ambiguities in the Adventist Trinity Doctrines

Historically, Adventists have had a difficult time
understanding the Trinity doctrine. Many early Adventist pioneers
regarded Trinitarianism as a perversion of the truth about God.[^moon] 
Joseph Bates rejected Trinitarianism because he thought that it taught
that the Son is identical to the Father: "Respecting the trinity, I
concluded that it was an impossibility for me to believe that the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, was also the Almighty God, the
Father, one and the same being."[^bates]
J.N. Loughborough considered Trinitarianism "pagan and fabulous,"
writing, "It is not very consonant with common sense to talk of three
being one, and one being three. . . . If Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
each God, it would be three Gods; for three times one is not one, but
three."[^loughborough]
J.H. Waggoner argued that Trinitarianism undermines the Adventist
atonement doctrine by maintaining that only Christ's human nature died:
"Trinitarians hold that the term 'Christ' comprehends two distinct and
separate natures: one that was merely human; the other, the second
person in the trinity, who dwelt in the flesh for a brief period, but
could not possibly suffer, or die; that the Christ that died was only
the human nature in which the divinity had dwelt. . . . Thus the remark
is just, that the doctrine of a trinity degrades the Atonement, resting
it solely on a human offering as a basis."[^waggoner]

Although the Adventist Church gradually began
reversing its majority antitrinitarian position during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, significant problems remain in
the official formulation of the Trinity doctrine in the 28 Fundamental
Beliefs.
A glaring problem with the Fundamental Beliefs about God's nature is
that they offer no explanation of the relationship between the
three persons of the Godhead. Although the second Fundamental Belief,
entitled "The Trinity," affirms that the Godhead consists of three
persons, each characterized by immortality, omnipotence, omniscience,
transcendence, and omnipresence, it does not explain their
relationship.[^1] Are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit one God
because each person has these infinite attributes? How are these three
infinite persons a unity? How can we deny that the Godhead is a pantheon
of three gods, each possessing these attributes independently of the
others?

The third, fourth, and fifth Fundamental Beliefs try to answer
these questions, but they only introduce more ambiguities and difficulties.
The third Fundamental Belief, about the Father, states, "God the eternal
Father is the Creator, Source, Sustainer, and Sovereign of all creation.
He is just and holy, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding
in steadfast love and faithfulness. The qualities and powers exhibited
in the Son and the Holy Spirit are also those of the Father."[^2] This
doctrine ascribes several vocations to the Father: creator, source,
sustainer, and sovereign. However, these vocations do not establish a
relationship between the Father and the other persons of the Godhead,
but rather a relationship between the Father and created beings. The
doctrine also ascribes several qualities to the Father: justice,
holiness, mercy, graciousness, patience, love, and faithfulness. But
since these qualities do not belong exclusively to the Father, and since
the doctrine also states that the qualities and powers of the Son and
Holy Spirit also belong to the Father, we cannot distinguish him from
the other persons of the Godhead by these qualities. In short, the third
Fundamental Belief does not describe the relationship between the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Rather, it leaves one to conclude that the
Father is different from the Son and Holy Spirit because he has a
different vocation relative to his creatures.

The fourth Fundamental Belief, about the Son, further obscures the
relationship between the persons of the Godhead. Its full text states:

> God the eternal Son became incarnate in Jesus Christ. Through Him all
> things were created, the character of God is revealed, the salvation
> of humanity is accomplished, and the world is judged. Forever truly
> God, He became also truly human, Jesus the Christ. He was conceived of
> the Holy Spirit and born of the virgin Mary. He lived and experienced
> temptation as a human being, but perfectly exemplified the
> righteousness and love of God. By His miracles He manifested God's
> power and was attested as God's promised Messiah. He suffered and died
> voluntarily on the cross for our sins and in our place, was raised
> from the dead, and ascended to heaven to minister in the heavenly
> sanctuary in our behalf. He will come again in glory for the final
> deliverance of His people and the restoration of all things.[^3]

Several elements of this doctrine are worth noting. First, it
distinguishes the Son from the other persons of the Godhead by affirming
that he is the only divine person who became incarnate as a human being,
Jesus Christ. He is therefore the only person of the Godhead who could
be affected by temptation, suffering, and death, at least insofar as he
was a human.

Second, the Son has several other vocations that distinguish him from
the Father and the Holy Spirit. He is the means by which the universe
was created. This indicates one relationship between the Father and the
Son: while the Father initiated the creation of the universe, it was
through the Son that this act was directly accomplished. Nevertheless,
the exact nature of this relationship remains unclear. Is the Son an
instrument used by the Father to create the world? If not, how can we
ascribe the world's creation to the Father if the Son directly created
it?

Another vocation attributed to the Son is that he is the means by which
God's character is revealed to the universe's inhabitants. The Son
reveals the Father's character by perfectly exemplifying his
righteousness and love and performing miracles through the Father's
power. Again, the exact nature of this relationship needs clarification.
How can we know that these characteristics belong to the Father and not
only the Son, if the Son is the direct means by which righteousness,
love, and supernatural power are revealed? How does the Son's
sinlessness exemplify the Father's righteousness? How does his
self-sacrifice on the cross exemplify the Father's love? How do Jesus'
miracles prove that the Father is powerful?

A third vocation attributed to the Son is that he is the means by which
humanity is saved. The ninth Fundamental Belief describes how this was
accomplished. It states that the Son was the means by which God saved
humanity since it was through the Son that he "vindicates the
righteousness of God's law and the graciousness of His character."
Because of "Christ's life of perfect obedience to God's will," as
expressed in his law, God could vindicate his law by showing that its
condemnation of sin is just. Through Christ's death, he could ensure
that the penalty for sin was paid on behalf of those who believe Christ
is the Son of God. Through Christ's resurrection, God "proclaims God's
triumph over the forces of evil," or those who deny that his law is
righteous. In short, atonement consists of vindicating God's law, which
is the only means by which humanity can be saved since humanity must be
saved from the evil forces who have persuaded us that God's law is not
righteous.[^4]

Setting aside this doctrine's insistence on obedience to the law as the
ultimate purpose of salvation, which in my view amounts to a doctrine of
righteousness by works, it also obscures the relationship between the
Father and the Son. To state that Christ vindicated God's law by
perfectly obeying his will suggests that Christ could have contradicted
God's will through disobedience. Does this mean the Son's will is
distinct from the Father's? If so, how can we affirm the unity of the
Godhead, since it would be possible for the three persons to act
independently of the others? If the Son's will is the same as the
Father's, how does Christ's perfect obedience to the law vindicate it?
The justice of God's law cannot be demonstrated by showing that God can
obey himself---unless, tautologically, we define "justice" as obedience
to God's law, in which case there is nothing to show! Only if there is a
standard of justice higher than God's law would it be necessary to show
that it is just.

The fourth vocation attributed to the Son in the fourth Fundamental
Belief is that he is the means by which God judges the world. This
alludes to the twenty-fourth Fundamental Belief, "Christ's Ministry in
the Heavenly Sanctuary," which states that in the heavenly sanctuary,
Christ is currently accomplishing "a work of investigative judgment"
through which he is showing the "heavenly intelligences" who among the
dead will be resurrected to eternal life and "who among the living are
abiding in Christ, keeping the commandments of God and the faith of
Jesus."[^5] However, as with the other vocations ascribed to Christ,
this does not provide us a means of distinguishing the Son from the
Father. Why should we believe that the Son, not the Father, shows the
heavenly intelligences who will be saved?

A final element worth noting about the fourth Fundamental Belief is its
suggestion that the Son was "conceived of the Holy Spirit." Does this
mean that the Son was generated from the Holy Spirit, and if so, does
this not confuse the Holy Spirit with the Father by suggesting that the
Holy Spirit is Christ's biological father? As I will explain below, the
traditional doctrine of the Trinity maintains that the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father and the Son. However, the fourth Fundamental
Belief introduces an ambiguity by not clearly distinguishing between the
conception of Christ in his human form and the generation of the Son as
an eternal, coequal person of the Godhead.

The fifth Fundamental Belief, about the Holy Spirit, seems almost
conciliatory in its attempt to affirm the traditional doctrine of the
Trinity, especially with its insistence that the Holy Spirit "is as much
a person as are the Father and the Son." It states, "God the eternal
Spirit was active with the Father and the Son in Creation, incarnation,
and redemption," but it does not explain how this was the case. It
describes the Holy Spirit's vocations as inspiring prophets and
influencing people to accept salvation through Christ. It also
identifies two relationships between the Holy Spirit and the other
persons of the Godhead. First, the Holy Spirit "filled Christ's life
with power." Does this mean that without the Holy Spirit, Christ had no
power? If so, how can we affirm that Christ was innately God, who is
omnipotent? Second, the doctrine states that the Holy Spirit was "sent"
by the Father and the Son. Here we find the sort of processional
language that we should expect in any orthodox formulation of
Trinitarianism, which distinguishes the persons of the Godhead by their
processional relationships. However, we could interpret the word "sent"
to mean that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit have distinct wills and
that unless the Father and Son had been him to assist believers, he
might not have done so.

In short, the only means that the Fundamental Beliefs offer us to
distinguish between the persons of the Godhead are their respective
vocations. However, this distinction admits several possible
interpretations of the relationship between the divine persons. Are the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit merely "modes" of a single God, by which he
is conceived as acting in different capacities to achieve his various
goals? Or do the divine persons each possess a distinct will, by which
they act independently from each other? If the only way of
distinguishing the persons of the Godhead is by their vocations, both
options are plausible. However, both of these positions have
historically been considered heresies. The former option is modalism,
while the latter is tritheism or Arianism.

I propose that what is missing from the Adventist Trinity doctrines is
an explanation of the relationships between the persons of the Godhead.
Only if the persons of the Godhead are distinguished by these
relationships and not by their vocations can we affirm the distinction
between them. For this reason, Trinitarianism distinguishes the divine
persons by their relationships of procession from the Father. I
therefore want to examine the main components of Trinitarianism, as
traditionally formulated. To this end, I will consider Thomas Aquinas'
discussion of Trinitarianism in his *Summa Theologica*. After examining
Aquinas' views, I will conclude this article by offering specific
suggestions about how the Fundamental Beliefs on the Godhead can be
better aligned with Trinitarian orthodoxy.

## The Trinitarian Doctrine of Procession

The orthodox formulation of the Trinity doctrine dates to 325 when
Christian bishops from throughout the Roman Empire met at Nicaea in
present-day Türkiye to resolve controversies concerning the relationship
between the three persons of the Godhead. Organized by Constantine I,
the Council of Nicaea sought a consensus on the relationship between the
Father and the Son, which was the subject of controversy between the
followers of Athanasius, who believed that the Son was "begotten" of the
Father and had no beginning, and the followers of Arius, who believed
that the Son was created by the Father and had a definite beginning.
Ultimately, most delegates at the Council of Nicaea rejected the Arian
position. In response to Arius and his followers, they formulated the
Nicene Creed, which remains the standard statement of Trinitarianism
among mainstream Christian denominations.

In the Nicene Creed, the relationships between the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit are described as processional in nature. It states that
there is only "one God, the Father, the Almighty, maker of heaven and
earth." There is "one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, eternally
begotten of the Father, God from God, . . . begotten, not made,
consubstantial to the Father. Through him all things were made. . . . By
the power of the Holy Spirit he became incarnate from the Virgin Mary,
and was made man." Finally, there is "the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the
giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son."[^6] In short,
the Son was *begotten* of the Father and consists of the same substance
as the Father; the Holy Spirit *proceeds* from the Father and the Son;
and the Son became incarnate by the power of the Holy Spirit.

The Nicene Creed does not explain the meaning of the processional verbs
"to beget" and "to proceed." We must turn to later Christian
philosophers, such as Thomas Aquinas, to clarify these terms. In his
*Summa Theologica*, Aquinas follows the Nicene Creed in distinguishing
the Son and the Holy Spirit by how they proceed from the Father.

Aquinas begins by asking whether processional relationships can
meaningfully be ascribed to God. Aquinas states, "Divine Scripture uses,
in relation to God, names which signify procession." He cites John 8:42,
in which Christ tells the Jewish leaders that the Father sent him.
However, he explains that the processional verb "sent" should not be
understood as a relation between cause and effect or between an agent
and its actions. The Father did not cause the Son and the Holy Spirit to
exist as the Arians maintained. This would suggest that the Son and the
Holy Spirit, being mere creatures, are less divine than the Father,
whereas 1 John 5:20 states that the Son of God "is the true God." Nor
are the Son and the Holy Spirit distinguished from the Father by their
activities or vocations, as the modalists or Sabellians maintained. In
John 5:19, Jesus tells the Jews, "the Son can do nothing on his own."
However, if this is the case, the Son cannot be distinguished from the
Father by his acts. Aquinas argues that despite affirming different
views of the relationship between the persons of the Godhead, the Arians
and the Sabellians committed the same error. They assumed that the
processional relationships described in the Johannine literature were
outward acts. By contrast, the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity affirms
that these processional relationships are intrinsic to God. Aquinas
states, "Procession . . . is not to be understood from what it is in
bodies, either according to local movement or by way of a cause
proceeding forth to its exterior effect. . . . Rather it is to be
understood by way of an intelligible emanation, for example, of the
intelligible word which proceeds from the speaker, yet remains in
him."[^7]

According to Aquinas, two kinds of processional activity may be found in
intellectual beings like God and human souls: *acts of intelligence* and
*acts of will* (volition). The former are motivated by a desire to know
the truth, while the latter are motivated by a desire to obtain what is
beneficial or beautiful. Aquinas argues that God, no less than the human
soul, is characterized by acts of intelligence and will. Specifically,
he claims that the procession of the Son from the Father is an act of
intelligence and that the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father
and the Son is an act of volition---although, as he emphasizes, these
processions are not extrinsic, but intrinsic to his nature.[^8]

The Son proceeds from the Father by an intellectual operation that
Aquinas calls *generation*, which has a similar meaning to the verb "to
beget." Aquinas clarifies that the eternal generation of the Son from
the Father should not be understood in a naturalistic sense. There are
two senses of the word "generation." In the *material* sense, generation
describes anything that comes into existence through composition or
generation and ceases to exist through decomposition or corruption. In
the *formal* sense, Aquinas states, generation describes an activity
that properly "belongs to living things; in which sense it signifies the
origin of a living being from a conjoined living principle." Aquinas
affirms that in the case of natural living things, both senses of the
word "generation" are applicable. However, in the case of God, only the
formal sense of the word "generation" is appropriate. The generation of
the Son from the Father "proceeds by way of intelligible action" and "by
way of similitude, inasmuch as the concept of the intellect is a
likeness of the object conceived." That is, the object conceived in the
intellect of God, namely the Son, has the same nature as God himself,
just as, by analogy, children have a similar nature to their parents.
The Father and the Son have "the same nature, because in God the act of
understanding and His existence are the same." God is, by definition, an
omniscient being who necessarily exists, so when the Father conceives
the Son as existing, the Son necessarily exists, just as the Father
does.[^9] In other words, God begets himself by understanding himself;
the Son is God generating himself by his intellect.

The Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son by an intellectual
operation analogous to human volition. Volition is an act whereby an
agent proceeds towards what it desires or loves. It differs from
intellectual procession because rather than seeking to form a mental
representation of an object similar in nature to the agent, volitional
procession seeks to bring its object into fulfillment, regardless of the
similarities between the agent and the object. Thus there are two
different kinds of intellectual operations intrinsic to God. Aquinas
explains, "what proceeds in God by way of love, does not proceed as
begotten, or as son, but proceeds rather as spirit; which name expresses
a certain vital movement and impulse, accordingly as anyone is described
as moved or impelled by love to perform an action."[^10] The Father and
the Holy Spirit have the same nature because the object of God's
volition is nothing other than himself, who is always and already
perfect. God is, by definition, an omnipotent being who necessarily
exists, so when the Father wills that the Holy Spirit should exist, he
necessarily exists, just as the Father does. The Holy Spirit proceeds
from God's love for himself. In other words, the Holy Spirit is God
conceived as impelled by his will towards self-actualization.

## The Biblical Warrant for Trinitarianism

In Aquinas' view, since the procession of the Son and the Holy Spirit
are consequences of God's omniscience (his infinitely powerful
intellect) and omnipotence (his infinitely powerful will), God cannot be
conceived except as a Trinity. The relationships of procession between
the persons of the Godhead are essential to God's nature.[^11] However,
Aquinas denies that the Trinity can be known through natural reason
alone. He states, "by natural reason we can know what belongs to the
unity of the essence," but not the divine persons' "proper attributes,
such as paternity, filiation, and procession," by which they are
distinguished.[^12] These defining attributes, "paternity," "filiation,"
and "procession," can only be obtained from the Bible. It matters that
these terms should be used to describe the divine persons because the
Bible identifies them as their proper names.

The Father alone can be described as the unbegotten principle from which
the other persons of the Godhead proceed in their respective ways.[^13]
"Father" is his proper name, and "paternity" is the name of the relation
that distinguishes him from the other divine persons.[^14] These proper
names can only be accepted on the Bible's authority. Aquinas explains
that all paternal relations that we find between God and his creation or
among created things are imperfect reflections of God's paternal
relation to himself: "the perfect idea of paternity and filiation is to
be found in God the Father, and in God the Son, because one is the
nature and glory of the Father and the Son. But in the creature,
filiation is found in relation to God, not in a perfect manner, since
the Creator and the creature have not the same nature; but by way of a
certain likeness, which is the more perfect the nearer we approach to
the true idea of filiation." Thus, if we derive the idea of divine
paternity and filiation from our understanding of created things, we
would be unable to arrive at an adequate conception of the Father and
the Son. Our natural knowledge of the Father and the Son must be
supplemented with a special revelation from God. We only know that there
is a distinct Father and Son because the Bible names them.[^15]

The proper name of the Son, who is so called because he is eternally
generated from the Father, is the "Word." This name "signifies an
emanation of the intellect," just as the words we speak proceed from our
intellects as signifiers of objects represented in our minds. However,
whereas in human language, our words are imperfect expressions of our
imperfect knowledge of things existing outside us, the Word, as an
emanation from the intellect of God, is a perfect expression of God's
perfect knowledge and is intrinsic to his nature.[^16] A related name
for the Son is the "Image" of the Father, which not only emphasizes that
the Father and the Son have the same nature but that the Son is in the
Father's intellect (just as when we say that we "imagine" something, we
mean that we have formed an image of that thing in our mind).[^17]

Aquinas notes three proper names that the Bible applies to the Holy
Spirit. The first, "Holy Spirit," is derived from 1 John 5:6--8, which
describes how we recognize Jesus as the Messiah.[^18] Modern
translations of this passage, such as the New Revised Standard Version,
say, "This is the one who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not
with the water only but with the water and the blood. And the Spirit is
the one that testifies, for the Spirit is the truth. There are three
that testify [in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and
these three are one. And there are three that testify on earth]: the
Spirit and the water and the blood, and these three agree." Many
scholars consider the portion of verses 7--8 contained in brackets,
called the "Johannine comma," to be a later addition since it is absent
from many textual authorities. Nonetheless, by Aquinas' time, the
Johannine comma was considered canonical, and to name the divine person
who proceeds by love from the Father and the Son, we can regard this
insertion as sufficient, regardless of its authenticity.

The second proper name of the Holy Spirit is "Love," as suggested by
Romans 5:5: "God's love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy
Spirit that has been given to us." Although this name also applies to
God in his entirety, it especially signifies how the Spirit proceeds
from the Father and the Son.[^19] It also represents the relation of
love subsisting between the Father and the Son. Aquinas quotes
Augustine: "The Holy Ghost is he whereby the begotten is loved by the
one begetting and loves his begetter."[^20] The procession of the Holy
Spirit from this reciprocal relation is one reason why the Holy Spirit
is said to proceed from both the Father and the Son, and not from the
Father only (as Eastern Orthodox Christians believe).[^21]

The final proper name of the Holy Spirit is "Gift." Just as the Son is
named in virtue of his filial relation to the Father, so the Holy Spirit
is called "Gift" because he proceeds as a gift from the Father and the
Son.[^22] The biblical authority for this name of the Holy Spirit is
Acts 2:38, in which Peter says that those who repent in the name of
Jesus Christ "will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit."

## The Meaning and Equality of the Divine Persons

The three persons of the Godhead are thus called by their proper names,
which signify the processional relations by which they are
distinguished. As we have seen, these processional relations are
intrinsic to God's nature, since they are the processions of God's
intellect and will by which he eternally actualizes himself as a
self-subsistent being. When we use the term "person" to describe these
processional relations, this does not mean that the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit each have an independent intellect and will, just as
humans have independent cognitive faculties. Aquinas explains, "'person'
in general signifies the individual substance of a rational figure," or
what distinguishes one rational individual from another. When applied to
a human being, "it signifies this flesh, these bones, and this soul,
which are the individuating principles of a man." However, "person" must
be applied to God plurally. In God, there are three relations of
procession. These three relations are essential to God's nature, and as
such, they are self-subsistent, since God is self-subsistent. The word
"person," when applied to God, therefore denotes the three
self-subsisting relations in God.[^23]

Since the persons of the Godhead are hypostases (self-subsisting beings)
of the same essence, they are necessarily equal, since one person does
not possess the divine qualities to a greater or lesser extent than the
others.[^24] Moreover, although there is an order in procession (the Son
proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father
and the Son), there is no order of priority among the persons of the
Godhead. As Aquinas argues, "in God the relations themselves are the
persons subsisting in one nature. So, neither on the part of the nature,
nor on the part of the relations, can one person be prior to another,
not even in the order of nature and reason."[^25]

Because the persons of the Godhead are all equal, there is no eternal
hierarchy among them---not even a priority based on their
respective activities or "roles." The power of the Son is equal to the
power of the Father since he proceeds by eternal necessity from the
Father's intellect. The Son can do anything that the Father can do (John
5:19).[^26] Moreover, the vocations of the Son and the Holy Spirit are
only temporal. Rather than being essential to their divine
nature---since the only attribute that is essential to the Son and the
Holy Spirit as such are their processional relations---their vocations
were simply the most conducive means of obtaining our
sanctification.[^27] It is therefore senseless to state that the Son is
eternally subordinate to the Father, as many proponents of headship
theology maintain as the basis of their argument that the subordination
of women to men is modeled after the intra-Trinitarian relationship
between the Father and the Son. Christ was only subordinate to the
Father (or rather, himself) insofar as he is conceived as a temporal,
human being, but not in his eternal nature as God. As Aquinas states,
"the Son is greater than himself in human nature," or insofar as he was
a human being.[^28]

One might ask why only the Son became incarnate if the persons of the
Godhead have all the same powers and abilities. Aquinas affirms that the
other persons of the Godhead had the power to become incarnate.[^29]
However, he notes three reasons why it was more appropriate for the Son
to become incarnate than the Father or the Holy Spirit. First, because
the Son is properly called the Word, and because it was by God's word
that things were created, there is a natural affinity between the Word
and created things. Aquinas states, "He has a particular agreement with
human nature, since the Word is a concept of the eternal wisdom, from
whom all man's wisdom is derived. And hence man is perfected in wisdom
(which is his proper perfection, as he is rational) by participating in
the Word of God." Second, those whom God has preordained to be saved are
called the sons of God, according to Romans 8:17. "Hence it was fitting
that by him who is the natural Son, men should share this likeness of
sonship by adoption." Finally, the incarnation of the Son was intended
as the remedy for the first sin, which consisted of seeking inordinate
knowledge of good and evil. "Hence it was fitting that by the Word of
true knowledge man might be led back to God."[^30] For these reasons,
incarnation is properly attributed to the Son, rather than the Father
and the Holy Spirit.

When explaining the role of the Holy Spirit at Christ's incarnation, we
must avoid suggesting that the Son was begotten or generated at the
moment of his conception or that the Holy Spirit effectively begets the
Son. The Son preexisted his bodily form as Jesus Christ since he is
eternally generated from the Father. Moreover, the Holy Spirit proceeds
eternally from the Son, not vice versa. Rather, the Holy Spirit is
simply the efficient cause of Christ's body.[^31] The conception of
Christ is attributed to the Holy Spirit for three reasons. First, as
noted above, the Holy Spirit is God insofar as he loves himself. Since
the world is the product of God's love of himself, and since the
incarnation occurred because God loves the world (John 3:16), it is
appropriate that the incarnation of Christ should be attributed to the
Holy Spirit. Second, Jesus Christ is not called the Son of God due to
his merits (Christ did not earn his divinity through moral perfection),
but because of God's grace, which as a gift from God is attributed to
the Holy Spirit in 1 Corinthians 12:4: "there are varieties of gifts,
but the same Spirit." Finally, the purpose of the incarnation was to
enable us to share the likeness of God's Sonship by adoption, as stated
above. Galatians 4:6 says, "because you are children, God has sent the
Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, 'Abba! Father!'" We can
therefore conclude that by the same Spirit through which we become the
children of God, Christ also became the Son of God, insofar as he was
incarnate.[^32]

## How the Pioneers Misunderstood Trinitarianism

Aquinas states that we can only know these intrinsic processions in
God's mind because he has revealed them to us in the scriptural
tradition. Apart from the Bible, which has named these persons and their
processions, we would have an inadequate conception of the Trinity,
since we would be modeling our understanding of these processions on
human faculties.[^aquinas]

This was Bates' mistake: by basing his understanding of the Son's
generation from the Father on human procreation, he imagined it was
impossible to identify the Son with the Father, just as we cannot regard
human children as identical to their parents. Bates didn't understand
that when God begets himself through his intellect, the resulting
person---the Son---is still intrinsic to the Father (they have the same
nature), whereas human children have different natures than their
parents. Rather than taking God the Father's relation to the Son, as
revealed in scripture, as the standard of paternal relations, Bates took
human fathers' relations to their children as the standard and then
projected this standard onto God.

Likewise, when Loughborough considered it nonsensical "to talk of three
being one," he was right to suppose that we cannot distinguish the
divine persons through human reasoning alone. We tend to distinguish one
thing from another by considering their external relations (such as
their physical boundaries) with other things. However, the relations
among the divine persons are internal to God and therefore invisible to
us apart from divine revelation. We can only accept Trinitarianism by
faith in the scriptural tradition, through which God has revealed
himself to us.

Waggoner mistakenly assumed that the Son is distinguished from the
Father by his vocation rather than by his origin of procession. He
imagined that what primarily distinguishes the Son from the Father is
that he became a human and died to obtain our salvation. However,
Trinitarianism teaches that the eternal generation of the Son from the
Father, and not the Son's soteriological role alone, is what makes the
Son distinctive. When we affirm that Christ is the Son of God, we are
affirming that Jesus is God's incarnate intellection of himself and that
we can know God through faith because God's self-understanding has
become an embodied, historical entity. Christ achieves our salvation by
revealing God's selfless love for us. His death was not a "human
sacrifice," not only because Jesus was no mere human, but because
salvation comes through Christ's resurrection rather than his death
alone. God comprehends himself, in the person of his Son, as a selfless,
loving being whom death cannot defeat because he exists by eternal
necessity. Christianity teaches that salvation is participation in God's
eternal life through faith in Christ, in whom God became a historical
reality.

## Avoiding the Pioneers' Mistakes

Unfortunately, the 28 Fundamental Beliefs have not adequately corrected
the early Adventist pioneers' mistakes. They do not sufficiently convey
that the divine persons ought to be distinguished not by their vocations
but by their origins of procession. Consequently, many Adventists,
wrongly distinguishing the divine persons by their roles, have concluded
that the Son is eternally subordinate to the Father rather than coequal
with the Father. (They believe this hierarchy is the model for the
relationship between men and women.) Moreover, some Adventists, fearful
of anything superficially resembling "spiritualism," deny that the Holy
Spirit is a distinct person, regarding him as simply the life animating
the Father---as though God consists of an inseparable body and soul like
people. They believe that the Spirit is simply God acting in his
capacity as a living entity. Both errors result from the mistaken view
that the persons of the Godhead are or ought to be distinguished by
their activities or vocations.

To correct these mistakes, I'd like to propose several amendments to the
Fundamental Beliefs that would better align Adventist doctrine with
Trinitarian orthodoxy.

**Fundamental Belief 2 ("The Trinity").** I would modify the first
sentence of this doctrine to say, "There is one God: Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, a unity of three coeternal, *coequal, and consubstantial*
Persons, *differentiated by intrinsic relations of procession that are
essential to God's nature*" (the italics indicate the added portions).
This would indicate that the divine persons are essential to God's
nature and that there is no order of priority among them.

**Fundamental Belief 4 ("The Son").** First, I would modify the first
sentence of this doctrine to say, "God the eternal Son, *who is
eternally generated from the Father through God's intellection of
himself*, became incarnate in Jesus Christ." This expresses what is
distinctive about the Son, specifically the kind of procession that
distinguishes him from the Father and Holy Spirit.

Second, to clarify that the Son was not begotten by the Holy Spirit,
instead of saying, "He was conceived of the Holy Spirit," I would modify
this to say, "*His human body* was conceived of the Holy Spirit."

Third, rather than saying that Jesus "perfectly exemplified the
righteousness and love of God," I would say that he "*revealed* the
righteousness and love of God." This is to avoid suggesting that the
Father and the Son have distinct wills or that Jesus could have not
exemplified God's love and righteousness, which is impossible.

**Fundamental Belief 5 ("The Holy Spirit").** First, I would modify the
first sentence to say, "God the eternal Spirit, *sent by the will and
mutual love of the Father and Son*, was active in Creation, incarnation,
and redemption." Here, I have omitted that the Spirit was active "with
the Father and the Son," as though they are autonomous entities. This
expresses what is distinctive about the Holy Spirit and clarifies his
relation to the other persons of the Godhead.

Second, I would modify the second sentence, "He is as much a person as
are the Father and the Son," to clarify what "person" means in the
context of the Godhead, such as by saying, "He is as much a person, *or
a relation subsisting in God's nature*, as are the Father and the Son."

Third, I would omit the sentence, "He filled Christ's life with power,"
since the power of the divine persons is the same and the Bible also
attributes Christ's power to the Father (see John 5:19).

**Fundamental Belief 9 ("The Life, Death, and Resurrection of
Christ").** I would omit the phrase "In Christ's life of perfect
obedience to God's will," because it suggests that Christ's will was
distinct from the Father's. Rather, I would say, "*Because the Father
and the Son have the same will, the incarnate Christ perfectly revealed
God's goodness and love. Through Christ's* suffering, death, and
resurrection . . . ." (The additional benefit of this amendment is that
since the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, who have the
same will, it guarantees a more coherent understanding of the Holy
Spirit.)

I also recommend modifying any other Fundamental Beliefs that implicitly
suggest that the Son's will is distinct from the Father's or that the
Son is eternally subordinate to the Father.

### Works Cited

[^1]: General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists (GCSDA), "28
    Fundamental Beliefs" (2020), 3. Available online at
    <https://www.adventist.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/ADV-28Beliefs2020.pdf>.

[^moon]: See Jerry Moon, "Heresy or Hopeful Sign?" *Adventist Review*
    (April 22, 1999), 498. Available online at
    <https://digitalcommons.andrews.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4621&context=pubs>.

[^bates]: Joseph Bates, *The Autobiography of Elder Joseph Bates* (Battle
    Creek: Steam Press of the Seventh-day Adventist Publishing
    Association, 1868), 205. Available online at
    <https://m.egwwritings.org/en/book/1086/info>.

[^loughborough]: J.N. Loughborough, "Questions for Bro. Loughborough," *Adventist
    Review and Sabbath Herald* 18 (November 5, 1861), 184. Available
    online at
    <https://m.egwwritings.org/en/book/1685.6378#6613>.

[^waggoner]: J.H. Waggoner, *The Atonement* (Oakland: Pacific Press Publishing
    Association, 1884), 165. Available online at
    <https://m.egwwritings.org/en/book/1485.643#649>.

[^2]: GCSDA (2020), 3.

[^3]: GCSDA (2020), 3.

[^4]: GCSDA (2020), 5.

[^5]: GCSDA (2020), 10.

[^6]: From the Episcopal Church, *Book of Common Prayer* (Seabury Press:
    1979). Available online at
    <https://www.bcponline.org/General/nicene_creed.html>.

[^7]: Thomas Aquinas (ed. Kevin Knight, trans. Fathers of the English
    Dominican Province), *Summa Theologiae* (second ed.) (1920), 1.27.1.
    Available online at
    <https://www.newadvent.org/summa/>.

[^8]: Aquinas (1920), 1.27.5.

[^9]: Aquinas (1920), 1.27.2.

[^aquinas]: Aquinas (1920), 1.32.1.

[^10]: Aquinas (1920), 1.27.4.

[^11]: Aquinas (1920), 1.28.2.

[^12]: Aquinas (1920), 1.32.1.

[^13]: See Aquinas (1920), 1.33.1, 1.33.4.

[^14]: Aquinas (1920), 1.33.2.

[^15]: Aquinas (1920), 1.33.3.

[^16]: Aquinas (1920), 1.34.2.

[^17]: Aquinas (1920), 1.35.1.

[^18]: Aquinas (1920), 1.36.1.

[^19]: Aquinas (1920), 1.37.1.

[^20]: Aquinas (1920), 1.37.2; quoting Augustine, *On the Trinity*, 6.5.

[^21]: Cf. Aquinas (1920), 1.36.2. Aquinas argues that if the Holy
    Spirit proceeds only from the Father, as in the case of the Son,
    there would be no way to distinguish the procession of the Son and
    the Holy Spirit. Thus, the Holy Spirit must proceed from two
    principles, namely the Father and the Son, rather than only one, as
    the Son does.

[^22]: Aquinas (1920), 1.38.2.

[^23]: Aquinas (1920), 1.29.4.

[^24]: Aquinas (1920), 1.42.1.

[^25]: Aquinas (1920), 1.42.3.

[^26]: Aquinas (1920), 1.42.6.

[^27]: Aquinas (1920), 1.43.2, 1.43.3.

[^28]: Aquinas (1920), 3.20.2.

[^29]: Aquinas (1920), 3.3.5.

[^30]: Aquinas (1920), 3.3.8.

[^31]: Aquinas (1920), 3.32.2.

[^32]: Aquinas (1920), 3.32.1.
